# DEEP数据库:利用生理信号进行情绪分析

> Source: 2011DEEP-一个利用生理信号进行情绪分析的数据库.pdf

## Page 1

DEAP: A Database for Emotion Analysis
Using Physiological Signals
Sander Koelstra, Student Member, IEEE, Christian Mu¨hl,
Mohammad Soleymani, Student Member, IEEE, Jong-Seok Lee, Member, IEEE,
Ashkan Yazdani, Touradj Ebrahimi, Member, IEEE, Thierry Pun, Member, IEEE,
Anton Nijholt, Member, IEEE, and Ioannis (Yiannis) Patras, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—We present a multimodal data set for the analysis of human affective states. The electroencephalogram (EEG) and
peripheral physiological signals of 32 participants were recorded as each watched 40 one-minute long excerpts of music videos.
Participants rated each video in terms of the levels of arousal, valence, like/dislike, dominance, and familiarity. For 22 of the
32 participants, frontal face video was also recorded. A novel method for stimuli selection is proposed using retrieval by affective tags
from the last.fm website, video highlight detection, and an online assessment tool. An extensive analysis of the participants’ ratings
during the experiment is presented. Correlates between the EEG signal frequencies and the participants’ ratings are investigated.
Methods and results are presented for single-trial classification of arousal, valence, and like/dislike ratings using the modalities of EEG,
peripheral physiological signals, and multimedia content analysis. Finally, decision fusion of the classification results from different
modalities is performed. The data set is made publicly available and we encourage other researchers to use it for testing their own
affective state estimation methods.
Index Terms—Emotion classification, EEG, physiological signals, signal processing, pattern classification, affective computing.
Ç
1
INTRODUCTION
E
MOTION is a psycho-physiological process triggered by
conscious and/or unconscious perception of an object
or situation and is often associated with mood, tempera-
ment, personality and disposition, and motivation. Emo-
tions play an important role in human communication and
can be expressed either verbally through emotional voca-
bulary or by expressing nonverbal cues such as intonation
of voice, facial expressions, and gestures. Most of the
contemporary human-computer interaction (HCI) systems
are deficient in interpreting this information and suffer
from the lack of emotional intelligence. In other words, they
are unable to identify human emotional states and use this
information in deciding upon proper actions to execute. The
goal of affective computing is to fill this gap by detecting
emotional cues occurring during human-computer interac-
tion and synthesizing emotional responses.
Characterizing multimedia content with relevant, reli-
able, and discriminating tags is vital for multimedia
information retrieval. Affective characteristics of multi-
media are important features for describing multimedia
content and can be presented by such emotional tags.
Implicit affective tagging refers to the effortless generation
of subjective and/or emotional tags. Implicit tagging of
videos using affective information can help recommenda-
tion and retrieval systems to improve their performance [1],
[2], [3]. The current data set is recorded with the goal of
creating an adaptive music video recommendation system.
In our proposed music video recommendation system, a
user’s bodily responses will be translated to emotions. The
emotions of a user while watching music video clips will
help the recommender system to first understand the user’s
taste and then to recommend a music clip which matches
the user’s current emotion.
The database presented explores the possibility of
classifying emotion dimensions induced by showing music
videos to different users. To the best of our knowledge, the
responses to this stimuli (music video clips) have never
been explored before, and the research in this field was
mainly focused on images, music, or nonmusic video
segments [4], [5]. In an adaptive music video recommender,
an emotion recognizer trained by physiological responses to
content of a similar nature, music videos are better able to
fulfill its goal.
Various discrete categorizations of emotions have been
proposed, such as the six basic emotions proposed by
Ekman et al. [6] and the tree structure of emotions proposed
18
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AFFECTIVE COMPUTING,
VOL. 3,
NO. 1,
JANUARY-MARCH 2012
. S. Koelstra and I. Patras are with the School of Electronic Engineering and
Computer Science, Queen Mary University of London, Mile End Road,
London E1 4NS, United Kingdom.
E-mail: {sander.koelstra, I.Patras}@eecs.qmul.ac.uk.
. C. Mu¨hl and A. Nijholt are with the Human Media Interaction Group,
University of Twente, Postbus 217, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands.
E-mail: muehlc@ewi.utwente.nl, a.nijholt@utwente.nl.
. M. Soleymani and T. Pun are with the Computer Science Department,
University of Geneva, Battelle Campus, Building A 7, route de Drize,
Carouge (Geneva) CH-1227, Switzerland.
E-mail: {mohammad.soleymani, Thierry.Pun}@unige.ch.
. J.-S. Lee is with the School of Integrated Technology, Yonsei University,
Korea. E-mail: jong-seok.lee@yonsei.ac.kr.
. A. Yazdani and T. Ebrahimi are with the Multimedia Signal Processing
Group, Institute of Electrical Engineering (IEL), Ecole Polytechnique
Fe´de´rale de Lausanne (EPFL), Station 11, Lausanne CH-1015, Switzer-
land. E-mail: {ashkan.yazdani, touradj.ebrahimi}@epfl.ch.
Manuscript received 1 Nov. 2010; revised 1 Apr. 2011; accepted 18 Apr. 2011;
published online 6 June 2011.
Recommended for acceptance by B. Schuller, E. Douglas-Cowie, and A. Batliner.
For information on obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to:
taffc@computer.org, and reference IEEECS Log Number
TAFFCSI-2010-11-0104.
Digital Object Identifier no. 10.1109/T-AFFC.2011.15.
1949-3045/12/$31.00  2012 IEEE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society


## Page 2

by Parrott [7]. Dimensional scales of emotion have also been
proposed, such as Plutchik’s emotion wheel [8] and the
valence-arousal scale by Russell [9]. In this work, we use
Russell’s valence-arousal scale, widely used in research on
affect, to quantitatively describe emotions. In this scale,
each emotional state can be placed on a 2D plane with
arousal and valence as the horizontal and vertical axes.
While arousal and valence explain most of the variation in
emotional states, a third dimension of dominance can also
be included in the model [9]. Arousal can range from
inactive (e.g., uninterested, bored) to active (e.g., alert,
excited), whereas valence ranges from unpleasant (e.g., sad,
stressed) to pleasant (e.g., happy, elated). Dominance
ranges from a helpless and weak feeling (without control)
to an empowered feeling (in control of everything). For self-
assessment along these scales, we use the well-known self-
assessment manikins (SAM) [10].
Emotion assessment is often carried out through analysis
of users’ emotional expressions and/or physiological
signals. Emotional expressions refer to any observable
verbal and nonverbal behavior that communicates emotion.
So far, most of the studies on emotion assessment have
focused on the analysis of facial expressions and speech to
determine a person’s emotional state. Physiological signals
are also known to include emotional information that can be
used for emotion assessment, but they have received less
attention. They comprise the signals originating from the
central nervous system (CNS) and the peripheral nervous
system (PNS).
Recent advances in emotion recognition have motivated
the creation of novel databases containing emotional
expressions in different modalities. These databases mostly
cover speech, visual data, or audiovisual data (e.g., [11],
[12], [13], [14], [15]). The visual modality includes facial
expressions and/or body gestures. The audio modality
covers posed or genuine emotional speech in different
languages. Many of the existing visual databases include
only posed or deliberately expressed emotions.
Healey [16], [17] recorded one of the first affective
physiological data sets. She recorded 24 participants driving
around the Boston area and annotated the data set by the
drivers’ stress level. Responses of 17 of the 24 participants
are publicly available.1 Her recordings include electrocar-
diogram (ECG), galvanic skin response (GSR) recorded
from hands and feet, and electromyogram (EMG) from the
right trapezius muscle and respiration patterns.
To the best of our knowledge, the only publicly available
multimodal emotional databases which include both phy-
siological responses and facial expressions are the enterface
2005 emotional database and MAHNOB HCI [4], [5]. The first
one was recorded by Savran et al. [5]. This database includes
two sets. The first set has electroencephalogram (EEG),
peripheral physiological signals, functional near infrared
spectroscopy (fNIRS), and facial videos from five male
participants. The second data set only has fNIRS and facial
videos from 16 participants of both genders. Both databases
recorded spontaneous responses to emotional images from
the international affective picture system (IAPS) [18]. An
extensive review of affective audiovisual databases can be
found in [13] and [19]. The MAHNOB HCI database [4]
consists of two experiments. The responses including EEG,
physiological signals, eye gaze, audio, and facial expressions
of 30 people were recorded. In the first experiment,
participants watched 20 emotional videos extracted from
movies and online repositories. The second experiment was
a tag agreement experiment in which images and short
videos with human actions were shown the participants first
without a tag and then with a displayed tag. The tags were
either correct or incorrect and participants’ agreement with
the displayed tag was assessed.
There has been a large number of published works in the
domain of emotion recognition from physiological signals
[16], [20], [21], [22], [23], [24]. Of these studies, only a few
achieved notable results using video stimuli. Lisetti and
Nasoz [23] used physiological responses to recognize
emotions in response to movie scenes. The movie scenes
were selected to elicit six emotions, namely, sadness,
amusement, fear, anger, frustration, and surprise. They
achieved a high recognition rate of 84 percent for the
recognition of these six emotions. However, the classifica-
tion was based on the analysis of the signals in response to
preselected segments in the shown video known to be
related to highly emotional events.
Some efforts have been made toward implicit affective
tagging of multimedia content. Kierkels et al. [25] proposed
a method for personalized affective tagging of multimedia
using peripheral physiological signals. Valence and arousal
levels of participants’ emotions when watching videos were
computed from physiological responses using linear regres-
sion [26]. Quantized arousal and valence levels for a clip
were then mapped to emotion labels. This mapping enabled
the retrieval of video clips based on keyword queries. So
far, this novel method achieved low precision.
Yazdani et al. [27] proposed using a brain-computer
interface (BCI) based on P300 evoked potentials to
emotionally tag videos with one of the six Ekman basic
emotions [28]. Their system was trained with eight
participants and then tested on four others. They achieved
a high accuracy on selecting tags. However, in their
proposed system, a BCI only replaces the interface for
explicit expression of emotional tags, i.e., the method does
not implicitly tag a multimedia item using the participant’s
behavioral and psycho-physiological responses.
In addition to implicit tagging using behavioral cues,
multiple studies used multimedia content analysis (MCA)
for automated affective tagging of videos. Hanjalic and Xu
[29] introduced “personalized content delivery” as a
valuable tool in affective indexing and retrieval systems.
In order to represent affect in video, they first selected
video—and audio—content features based on their relation
to the valence-arousal space. Then, arising emotions were
estimated in this space by combining these features. While
valence arousal could be used separately for indexing,
they combined these values by following their temporal
pattern. This allowed for determining an affect curve,
shown to be useful for extracting video highlights in a
movie or sports video.
Wang and Cheong [30] used audio and video features to
classify basic emotions elicited by movie scenes. Audio was
classified into music, speech, and environment signals and
these were treated separately to shape an aural affective
KOELSTRA ET AL.: DEAP: A DATABASE FOR EMOTION ANALYSIS USING PHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNALS
19
1. http://www.physionet.org/pn3/drivedb/.


## Page 3

feature vector. The aural affective vector of each scene was
fused with video-based features such as key lighting and
visual excitement to form a scene feature vector. Finally,
using the scene feature vectors, movie scenes were
classified and labeled with emotions.
Soleymani et al. [31] proposed a scene affective char-
acterization using a Bayesian framework. Arousal and
valence of each shot were first determined using linear
regression. Then, arousal and valence values in addition to
content features of each scene were used to classify every
scene into three classes, namely, calm, excited positive, and
excited negative. The Bayesian framework was able to
incorporate the movie genre and the predicted emotion
from the last scene or temporal information to improve the
classification accuracy.
There are also various studies on music affective char-
acterization from acoustic features [32], [33], [34]. Rhythm,
tempo, Mel-frequency cepstral coefficients (MFCC), pitch,
and zero crossing rate are among common features which
have been used to characterize affect in music.
A pilot study for the current work was presented in [35].
In that study, six participants’ EEG and physiological
signals were recorded as each watched 20 music videos.
The participants rated arousal and valence levels and the
EEG and physiological signals for each video were
classified into low/high arousal/valence classes.
In the current work, music video clips are used as the
visual stimuli to elicit different emotions. To this end, a
relatively large set of music video clips was gathered using
a novel stimuli selection method. A subjective test was then
performed to select the most appropriate test material. For
each video, a one-minute highlight was selected automati-
cally. Thirty-two participants took part in the experiment
and their EEG and peripheral physiological signals were
recorded as they watched the 40 selected music videos.
Participants rated each video in terms of arousal, valence,
like/dislike, dominance, and familiarity. For 22 partici-
pants, frontal face video was also recorded.
This paper aims at introducing this publicly available2
database. The database contains all recorded signal data,
frontal face video for a subset of the participants, and
subjective ratings from the participants. Also included is the
subjective ratings from the initial online subjective annota-
tion and the list of 120 videos used. Due to licensing issues,
we are not able to include the actual videos, but YouTube
links are included. Table 1 gives an overview of the
database contents.
To the best of our knowledge, this database has the
highest number of participants in publicly available
databases for analysis of spontaneous emotions from
physiological signals. In addition, it is the only database
that uses music videos as emotional stimuli.
We present an extensive statistical analysis of the
participant’s ratings and of the correlates between the
EEG signals and the ratings. Preliminary single trial
classification results of EEG, peripheral physiological
signals, and MCA are presented and compared. Finally, a
fusion algorithm is utilized to combine the results of each
modality and arrive at a more robust decision.
The layout of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, the
stimuli selection procedure is described in detail. The
experiment setup is covered in Section 3. Section 4 provides
a statistical analysis of the ratings given by participants
during the experiment and a validation of our stimuli
selection method. In Section 5, correlates between the EEG
frequencies and the participants’ ratings are presented. The
method and results of single-trial classification are given in
Section 6. The conclusion of this work follows in Section 7.
2
STIMULI SELECTION
The stimuli used in the experiment were selected in several
steps. First, we selected 120 initial stimuli, half of which
were chosen semi-automatically and the rest manually.
Then, a one-minute highlight part was determined for each
stimulus. Finally, through a web-based subjective assess-
ment experiment, 40 final stimuli were selected. Each of
these steps is explained below.
2.1
Initial Stimuli Selection
Eliciting emotional reactions from test participants is a
difficult task and selecting the most effective stimulus
materials is crucial. We propose here a semi-automated
method for stimulus selection, with the goal of minimizing
the bias arising from the manual stimuli selection.
Sixty of the 120 initially selected stimuli were selected
using the Last.fm3 music enthusiast website. Last.fm allows
users to track their music listening habits and receive
recommendations for new music and events. Additionally,
it allows the users to assign tags to individual songs, thus
20
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AFFECTIVE COMPUTING,
VOL. 3,
NO. 1,
JANUARY-MARCH 2012
TABLE 1
Database Content Summary
2. http://www.eecs.qmul.ac.uk/mmv/data sets/deap/.
3. http://www.last.fm.


## Page 4

creating a folksonomy of tags. Many of the tags carry
emotional meanings, such as “depressing” or “aggressive.”
Last.fm offers an API, allowing one to retrieve tags and
tagged songs.
A list of emotional keywords was taken from [7] and
expanded to include inflections and synonyms, yielding
304 keywords. Next, for each keyword, corresponding tags
were found in the Last.fm database. For each found
affective tag, the 10 songs most often labeled with this tag
were selected. This resulted in a total of 1,084 songs.
The valence-arousal space can be subdivided into four
quadrants, namely, low arousal/low valence (LALV), low
arousal/high valence (LAHV), high arousal/low valence
(HALV), and high arousal/high valence (HAHV). In order
to ensure diversity of induced emotions, from the
1,084 songs, 15 were selected manually for each quadrant
according to the following criteria.
Does the tag accurately reflect the emotional content?
Examples of songs subjectively rejected according to this
criterion include songs that are tagged merely because the
song title or artist name corresponds to the tag. Also, in
some cases the lyrics may correspond to the tag, but the
actual emotional content of the song is entirely different
(e.g., happy songs about sad topics).
Is a music video available for the song? Music videos
for the songs were automatically retrieved from YouTube,
corrected manually where necessary. However, many songs
do not have a music video.
Is the song appropriate for use in the experiment? Since
our test participants were mostly European students, we
selected those songs most likely to elicit emotions for this
target demographic. Therefore, mainly, European or North
American artists were selected.
In addition to the songs selected using the method
described above, 60 stimulus videos were selected manu-
ally, with 15 videos selected for each of the quadrants in the
arousal/valence space. The goal here was to select those
videos expected to induce the most clear emotional
reactions for each of the quadrants. The combination of
manual selection and selection using affective tags pro-
duced a list of 120 candidate stimulus videos.
2.2
Detection of One-Minute Highlights
For each of the 120 initially selected music videos, a one-
minute segment for use in the experiment was extracted. In
order to extract a segment with maximum emotional
content, an affective highlighting algorithm is proposed.
Soleymani et al. [31] used a linear regression method to
calculate arousal for each shot of in movies. In their method,
the arousal and valence of shots were computed using a
linear regression on the content-based features. Informative
features for arousal estimation include loudness and energy
of the audio signals, motion component, visual excitement,
and shot duration. The same approach was used to
compute valence. There are other content features such as
color variance and key lighting that have been shown to be
correlated with valence [30]. The detailed description of the
content features used in this work is given in Section 6.2.
In order to find the best weights for arousal and valence
estimation using regression, the regressors were trained on
all shots in 21 annotated movies in the data set presented in
[31]. The linear weights were computed by means of a
relevance vector machine (RVM) from the RVM toolbox
provided by Tipping [36]. The RVM is able to reject
uninformative features during its training; hence, no further
feature selection was used for arousal and valence
determination.
The music videos were then segmented into one-minute
segments with 55 seconds overlap between segments.
Content features were extracted and provided the input
for the regressors. The emotional highlight score of the
ith segment ei was computed using the following equation:
ei ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
a2
i þ v2
i
q
:
ð1Þ
The arousal, ai, and valence, vi, were centered. Therefore,
a smaller emotional highlight score (ei) is closer to the
neutral state. For each video, the one-minute-long segment
with the highest emotional highlight score was chosen to be
extracted for the experiment. For a few clips, the automatic
affective highlight detection was manually overridden. This
was done only for songs with segments that are particularly
characteristic of the song, well known to the public, and
most likely to elicit emotional reactions. In these cases, the
one-minute highlight was selected so that these segments
were included.
Given the 120 one-minute music video segments, the
final selection of 40 videos used in the experiment was
made on the basis of subjective ratings by volunteers, as
described in the next section.
2.3
Online Subjective Annotation
From the initial collection of 120 stimulus videos, the final
40 test video clips were chosen by using a web-based
subjective emotion assessment interface. Participants
watched music videos and rated them on a discrete 9-point
scale for valence, arousal, and dominance. A screenshot of
the interface is shown in Fig. 1. Each participant watched as
many videos as he/she wanted and was able to end the
rating at any time. The order of the clips was randomized,
but preference was given to the clips rated by the least
number of participants. This ensured a similar number of
ratings for each video (14-16 assessments per video were
collected). It was ensured that participants never saw the
same video twice.
After all of the 120 videos were rated by at least
14 volunteers each, the final 40 videos for use in the
experiment were selected. To maximize the strength of
elicited emotions, we selected those videos that had the
strongest volunteer ratings and at the same time a small
variation. To this end, for each video x we calculated a
normalized arousal and valence score by taking the mean
rating divided by the standard deviation (x=x).
Then, for each quadrant in the normalized valence-
arousal space, we selected the 10 videos that lie closest to
the extreme corner of the quadrant. Fig. 2 shows the score
for the ratings of each video and the selected videos
highlighted in green. The video whose rating was closest to
the extreme corner of each quadrant is mentioned explicitly.
Of the 40 selected videos, 17 were selected via Last.fm
affective tags, indicating that useful stimuli can be selected
via this method.
KOELSTRA ET AL.: DEAP: A DATABASE FOR EMOTION ANALYSIS USING PHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNALS
21


## Page 5

3
EXPERIMENT SETUP
3.1
Materials and Setup
The experiments were performed in two laboratory
environments with controlled illumination. EEG and
peripheral physiological signals were recorded using a
Biosemi ActiveTwo system4 on a dedicated recording PC
(Pentium 4, 3.2 GHz). Stimuli were presented using a
dedicated stimulus PC (Pentium 4, 3.2 GHz) that sent
synchronization markers directly to the recording PC. For
presentation of the stimuli and recording the users’ ratings,
the “Presentation” software by Neurobehavioral systems5
was used. The music videos were presented on a 17-inch
screen (1;280  1;024, 60 Hz) and, in order to minimize eye
movements, all video stimuli were displayed at 800  600
resolution, filling approximately 2=3 of the screen. Subjects
were seated approximately 1 meter from the screen. Stereo
Philips speakers were used and the music volume was set at
a relatively loud level; however, each participant was asked
before the experiment whether the volume was comfortable
and it was adjusted when necessary.
EEG was recorded at a sampling rate of 512 Hz using
32 active AgCl electrodes (placed according to the interna-
tional 10-20 system). Thirteen peripheral physiological
signals (which will be further discussed in section 6.1) were
also recorded. Additionally, for the first 22 of the
32 participants, frontal face video was recorded in DV
quality using a Sony DCR-HC27E consumer-grade camcor-
der. The face video was not used in the experiments in this
paper, but is made publicly available along with the rest of
the data. Fig. 3 illustrates the electrode placement for
acquisition of peripheral physiological signals.
3.2
Experiment Protocol
Thirty-two healthy participants (50 percent females), aged
between 19 and 37 (mean age 26.9), participated in the
experiment. Prior to the experiment, each participant signed
a consent form and filled out a questionnaire. Next, they
were given a set of instructions to read informing them of
the experiment protocol and the meaning of different scales
used for self-assessment. An experimenter was also present
there to answer any questions. When the instructions were
clear to the participant, he/she was led into the experiment
room. After the sensors were placed and their signals
checked, the participants performed a practice trial to
familiarize themselves with the system. In this unrecorded
trial, a short video was shown, followed by a self-
assessment by the participant. Next, the experimenter
started the physiological signals recording and left the
room, after which the participant started the experiment by
pressing a key on the keyboard.
The experiment started with a two-minute baseline
recording, during which a fixation cross was displayed to
the participant (who was asked to relax during this period).
Then, the 40 videos were presented in 40 trials, each
consisting of the following steps:
1.
A 2-second screen displaying the current trial
number to inform the participants of their progress.
2.
A 5-second baseline recording (fixation cross).
3.
The 1-minute display of the music video.
22
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AFFECTIVE COMPUTING,
VOL. 3,
NO. 1,
JANUARY-MARCH 2012
Fig. 1. Screenshot of the web interface for subjective emotion
assessment.
Fig. 2. x=x value for the ratings of each video in the online
assessment. Videos selected for use in the experiment are highlighted
in green. For each quadrant, the most extreme video is detailed with the
song title and a screenshot from the video.
Fig. 3. Placement of peripheral physiological sensors. Four electrodes
were used to record EOG and four for EMG (zygomaticus major and
trapezius muscles). In addition, GSR, blood volume pressure (BVP),
temperature, and respiration were measured.
4. http://www.biosemi.com.
5. http://www.neurobs.com.


## Page 6

4.
Self-assessment for arousal, valence, liking, and
dominance.
After 20 trials, the participants took a short break. During
the break, they were offered some cookies and noncaffei-
nated, nonalcoholic beverages. The experimenter then
checked the quality of the signals and the electrodes
placement and the participants were asked to continue the
second half of the test. Fig. 4 shows a participant shortly
before the start of the experiment.
3.3
Participant Self-Assessment
At the end of each trial, participants performed a self-
assessment of their levels of arousal, valence, liking, and
dominance. Self-assessment manikins [37] were used to
visualize the scales (see Fig. 5). For the liking scale, thumbs
down/thumbs up symbols were used. The manikins were
displayed in the middle of the screen with the numbers 1-9
printed below. Participants moved the mouse strictly
horizontally just below the numbers and clicked to indicate
their self-assessment level. Participants were informed they
could click anywhere directly below or in-between the
numbers, making the self-assessment a continuous scale.
The valence scale ranges from unhappy or sad to happy
or joyful. The arousal scale ranges from calm or bored to
stimulated or excited. The dominance scale ranges from
submissive (or “without control”) to dominant (or “in
control, empowered”). A fourth scale asks for participants’
personal liking of the video. This last scale should not be
confused with the valence scale. This measure inquires
about the participants’ tastes, not their feelings. For
example, it is possible to like videos that make one feel
sad or angry. Finally, after the experiment, participants
were asked to rate their familiarity with each of the songs
on a scale of 1 (“Never heard it before the experiment”) to 5
(“Knew the song very well”).
4
ANALYSIS OF SUBJECTIVE RATINGS
In this section, we describe the effect the affective stimula-
tion had on the subjective ratings obtained from the
participants. First, we will provide descriptive statistics
for the recorded ratings of liking, valence, arousal,
dominance, and familiarity. Second, we will discuss the
covariation of the different ratings with each other.
Stimuli were selected to induce emotions in the four
quadrants of the valence-arousal space (LALV, HALV,
LAHV, and HAHV). The stimuli from these four affect
elicitation conditions generally resulted in the elicitation of
the target emotion aimed for when the stimuli were
selected, ensuring that large parts of the arousal-valence
plane are covered (see Fig. 6). Wilcoxon signed-rank tests
showed that low and high arousal stimuli induced different
valence ratings (p < 0:0001 and p < 0:00001). Similarly, low
and high valenced stimuli induced different arousal ratings
(p < 0:001 and p < 0:0001).
The emotion elicitation specifically worked well for the
high arousing conditions, yielding relative extreme valence
ratings for the respective stimuli. The stimuli in the low
arousing conditions were less successful in the elicitation of
strong valence responses. Furthermore, some stimuli of the
KOELSTRA ET AL.: DEAP: A DATABASE FOR EMOTION ANALYSIS USING PHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNALS
23
Fig. 4. A participant shortly before the experiment.
Fig. 5. Images used for self-assessment. From the top: Valence SAM,
arousal SAM, dominance SAM, and liking.
Fig. 6. The mean locations of the stimuli on the arousal-valence plane
(AV plane) for the four conditions (LALV, HALV, LAHV, and HAHV).
Liking is encoded by color: Dark red is low liking and bright yellow is high
liking. Dominance is encoded by symbol size: Small symbols stand for
low dominance and big for high dominance.


## Page 7

LAHV condition induced higher arousal than expected on
the basis of the online study. Interestingly, this results in a C-
shape of the stimuli on the valence-arousal plane also
observed in the well-validated ratings for the IAPS [18] and
the international affective digital sounds system (IADS) [38],
indicating the general difficulty in inducing emotions with
strong valence, but low arousal. The distribution of the
individual ratings per conditions (see Fig. 7) shows a large
variance within conditions, resulting from between-stimulus
and participant variations, possibly associated with stimulus
characteristics or interindividual differences in music taste,
general mood, or scale interpretation. However, the sig-
nificant differences between the conditions in terms of the
ratings of valence and arousal reflect the successful elicitation
of the targeted affective states (see Table 2).
The distribution of ratings for the different scales and
conditions suggests a complex relationship between ratings.
We explored the mean intercorrelation of the different scales
over participants (see Table 3), as they might be indicative of
possible confounds or unwanted effects of habituation or
fatigue. We observed high positive correlations between
liking and valence, and between dominance and valence.
Seemingly, without implying any causality, people liked
music which gave them a positive feeling and/or a feeling of
empowerment. Medium positive correlations were observed
between arousal and dominance, and between arousal and
liking. Familiarity correlated moderately positive with liking
and valence. As already observed above, the scales of
valence and arousal are not independent, but their positive
correlation is rather low, suggesting that participants were
able to differentiate between these two important concepts.
Stimulus order had only a small effect on liking and
dominance ratings and no significant relationship with the
other ratings, suggesting that effects of habituation and
fatigue were kept to an acceptable minimum.
In summary, the affect elicitation was in general
successful, though the low valence conditions were par-
tially biased by moderate valence responses and higher
arousal. High scale intercorrelations observed are limited to
the scale of valence with those of liking and dominance, and
might be expected in the context of musical emotions. The
rest of the scale intercorrelations are small or medium in
strength, indicating that the scale concepts were well
distinguished by the participants.
5
CORRELATES OF EEG AND RATINGS
For the investigation of the correlates of the subjective ratings
with the EEG signals, the EEG data were common average
referenced, downsampled to 256 Hz, and high-pass filtered
with a 2 Hz cutoff frequency using the EEGlab6 toolbox. We
removed eye artifacts with a blind source separation
technique.7 Then, the signals from the last 30 seconds of
each trial (video) were extracted for further analysis. To
correct for stimulus-unrelated variations in power over time,
the EEG signal from the 5 seconds before each video was
extracted as baseline.
The frequency power of trials and baselines between 3 and
47 Hz was extracted with Welch’s method with windows of
256 samples. The baseline power was then subtracted from
the trial power, yielding the change of power relative to the
pre-stimulus period. These changes of power were averaged
over the frequency bands of theta (3-7 Hz), alpha (8-13 Hz),
beta (14-29 Hz), and gamma (30-47 Hz). For the correlation
statistic, we computed the Spearman correlated coefficients
24
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AFFECTIVE COMPUTING,
VOL. 3,
NO. 1,
JANUARY-MARCH 2012
Fig. 7. The distribution of the participants’ subjective ratings per scale (L—general rating, V—valence, A—arousal, D—dominance, and F—familiarity)
for the four affect elicitation conditions (LALV, HALV, LAHV, and HAHV).
TABLE 2
The Mean Values (and Standard Deviations) of the
Different Ratings of Liking (1-9), Valence (1-9),
Arousal (1-9), Dominance (1-9), and Familiarity (1-5)
for Each Affect Elicitation Condition
TABLE 3
The Means of the Subject-Wise Intercorrelations between the
Scales of Valence, Arousal, Liking, Dominance, Familiarity and
the Order of the Presentation (i.e., Time) for All 40 Stimuli
Significant correlations (p < 0:05) according to Fisher’s method are
indicated by stars.
6. http://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/.
7. http://www.cs.tut.fi/gomezher/projects/eeg/aar.htm.


## Page 8

between the power changes and the subjective ratings, and
computed the p-values for the left- (positive) and right-tailed
(negative) correlation tests. This was done for each partici-
pant separately and, assuming independence [39], the
32 resulting p-values per correlation direction (positive/
negative), frequency band, and electrode were then com-
bined to one p-value via Fisher’s method [40].
Fig. 8 shows the (average) correlations with significantly
(p < 0:05) correlating electrodes highlighted. Below, we will
report and discuss only those effects that were significant
with p < 0:01. A comprehensive list of the effects can be
found in Table 4.
For arousal we found negative correlations in the theta,
alpha, and gamma bands. The central alpha power decrease
for higher arousal matches the findings from our earlier
pilot study [35] and an inverse relationship between alpha
power and the general level of arousal has been reported
before [41], [42].
Valence showed the strongest correlations with EEG
signals and correlates were found in all analyzed frequency
bands. In the low frequencies, theta and alpha, an increase of
valence led to an increase of power. This is consistent with
the findings in the pilot study. The location of these effects
over occipital regions, thus over visual cortices, might
indicate a relative deactivation, or top-down inhibition, of
these due to participants focusing on the pleasurable sound
[43]. For the beta frequency band we found a central
decrease, also observed in the pilot, and an occipital and
KOELSTRA ET AL.: DEAP: A DATABASE FOR EMOTION ANALYSIS USING PHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNALS
25
Fig. 8. The mean correlations (over all participants) of the valence, arousal, and general ratings with the power in the broad frequency bands of theta
(4-7 Hz), alpha (8-13 Hz), beta (14-29 Hz), and gamma (30-47 Hz). The highlighted sensors correlate significantly (p < 0:05) with the ratings.
TABLE 4
The Electrodes for Which the Correlations with the Scale Were Significant ( ¼ p < 0:01, ¼ p < 0:001)
Also shown is the mean of the subject-wise correlations ( R), the most negative (R), and the most positive correlation (Rþ).


## Page 9

right temporal increase of power. Increased beta power over
right temporal sites was associated with positive emotional
self-induction and external stimulation in [44]. Similarly,
Onton and Makeig [45] have reported a positive correlation
of valence and high-frequency power, including beta and
gamma bands, emanating from anterior temporal cerebral
sources. Correspondingly, we observed a highly significant
increase of left and especially right temporal gamma power.
However, it should be mentioned that the EMG (muscle)
activity is also prominent in the high frequencies, especially
over anterior and temporal electrodes [46].
The liking correlates were found in all analyzed
frequency bands. For theta and alpha power, we observed
increases over left fronto-central cortices. Liking might be
associated with an approach motivation. However, the
observation of an increase of left alpha power for a higher
liking conflicts with findings of a left frontal activation,
leading to lower alpha over this region, often reported for
emotions associated with approach motivations [47]. This
contradiction might be reconciled when taking into account
that it is quite possible that some disliked pieces induced an
angry feeling (due to having to listen to them or simply due
to the content of the lyrics), which is also related to an
approach motivation, and might hence result in a left-ward
decrease of alpha. The right temporal increases found in the
beta and gamma bands are similar to those observed for
valence, and the same caution should be applied. In general,
the distribution of valence and liking correlations shown in
Fig. 8 seem very similar, which might be a result of the high
intercorrelations of the scales discussed above.
Summarizing, we can state that the correlations observed
partially concur with observations made in the pilot study
and in other studies exploring the neuro-physiological
correlates of affective states. They might, therefore, be taken
as valid indicators of emotional states in the context of
multimodal musical stimulation. However, the mean
correlations are seldom larger than 0:1, which might be
due to high interparticipant variability in terms of brain
activations, as individual correlations between 0:5 were
observed for a given scale correlation at the same electrode/
frequency combination. The presence of this high inter-
participant variability justifies a participant-specific classi-
fication approach, as we employ it, rather than a single
classifier for all participants.
6
SINGLE TRIAL CLASSIFICATION
In this section, we present the methodology and results of
single-trial classification of the videos. Three different
modalities were used for classification, namely, EEG
signals, peripheral physiological signals, and MCA. Condi-
tions for all modalities were kept equal and only the feature
extraction step varies.
Three different binary classification problems were
posed: the classification of low/high arousal, low/high
valence, and low/high liking. To this end, the participants’
ratings during the experiment are used as the ground truth.
The ratings for each of these scales are thresholded into two
classes (low and high). On the 9-point rating scales, the
threshold was simply placed in the middle. Note that for
some subjects and scales, this leads to unbalanced classes.
To give an indication of how unbalanced the classes are, the
mean and standard deviation (over participants) of the
percentage of videos belonging to the high class per rating
scale are as follows: arousal 59 percent (15 percent), valence
57 percent (9 percent), and liking 67 percent (12 percent).
In light of this issue, in order to reliably report results, we
report the F1-core, which is commonly employed in
information retrieval and takes the class balance into
account, contrary to the mere classification rate. In addition,
we use a naive Bayes classifier, a simple and generalizable
classifier which is able to deal with unbalanced classes in
small training sets.
First, the features for the given modality are extracted for
each trial (video). Then, for each participant, the F1 measure
was used to evaluate the performance of emotion classifica-
tion in a leave-one-out cross validation scheme. At each step
of the cross validation, one video was used as the test set
and the rest were used as training set. We use Fisher’s linear
discriminant J for feature selection:
JðfÞ ¼ j1  2j
2
1 þ 2
2
;
ð2Þ
where  and  are the mean and standard deviation for
feature f. We calculate this criterion for each feature and
then apply a threshold to select the maximally discriminat-
ing ones. This threshold was empirically determined at 0.3.
A Gaussian naive Bayes classifier was used to classify the
test set as low/high arousal, valence, or liking.
The naive Bayes classifier G assumes independence of
the features and is given by
Gðf1; ::; fnÞ ¼ argmax
c
pðC ¼ cÞ
Y
n
i¼1
pðFi ¼ fijC ¼ cÞ;
ð3Þ
where F is the set of features and C the classes. pðFi ¼
fijC ¼ cÞ is estimated by assuming Gaussian distributions
of the features and modeling these from the training set.
The following section explains the feature extraction
steps for the EEG and peripheral physiological signals.
Section 6.2 presents the features used in MCA classification.
In Section 6.3, we explain the method used for decision
fusion of the results. Finally, Section 6.4 presents the
classification results.
6.1
EEG and Peripheral Physiological Features
Most of the current theories of emotion [48], [49] agree that
physiological activity is an important component of an
emotion. For instance, several studies have demonstrated
the existence of specific physiological patterns associated
with basic emotions [6].
The following peripheral nervous system signals were
recorded: GSR, respiration amplitude, skin temperature,
electrocardiogram, blood volume by plethysmograph, elec-
tromyograms of Zygomaticus and Trapezius muscles, and
electrooculogram (EOG). GSR provides a measure of the
resistance of the skin by positioning two electrodes on the
distal phalanges of the middle and index fingers. This
resistance decreases due to an increase of perspiration, which
usually occurs when one is experiencing emotions such as
stress or surprise. Moreover, Lang et al. [20] discovered that
the mean value of the GSR is related to the level of arousal.
26
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AFFECTIVE COMPUTING,
VOL. 3,
NO. 1,
JANUARY-MARCH 2012


## Page 10

A plethysmograph measures blood volume in the
participant’s thumb. This measurement can also be used
to compute the heart rate (HR) by identification of local
maxima (i.e., heart beats), interbeat periods, and heart rate
variability (HRV). Blood pressure and HRV correlate with
emotions since stress can increase blood pressure. Pleasant-
ness of stimuli can increase peak heart rate response [20]. In
addition to the HR and HRV features, spectral features
derived from HRV were shown to be a useful feature in
emotion assessment [50].
Skin temperature and respiration were recorded since
they vary with different emotional states. Slow respiration
is linked to relaxation while irregular rhythm, quick
variations, and cessation of respiration correspond to more
aroused emotions like anger or fear.
Regarding the EMG signals, the Trapezius muscle (neck)
activity was recorded to investigate possible head move-
ments during music listening. The activity of the Zygoma-
ticus major was also monitored since this muscle is
activated when the participant laughs or smiles. Most of
the power in the spectrum of an EMG during muscle
contraction is in the frequency range between 4 and 40 Hz.
Thus, the muscle activity features were obtained from the
energy of EMG signals in this frequency range for different
muscles. The rate of eye blinking is another feature which is
correlated with anxiety. Eye blinking affects the EOG signal
and results in easily detectable peaks in that signal. For
further reading on psychophysiology of emotion, we refer
the reader to [51].
All the physiological responses were recorded at a 512 Hz
sampling rate and later downsampled to 256 Hz to reduce
prcoessing time. The trend of the ECG and GSR signals was
removed by subtracting the temporal low frequency drift.
The low frequency drift was computed by smoothing the
signals on each ECG and GSR channels with a 256 points
moving average.
In total, 106 features were extracted from peripheral
physiological responses based on the proposed features in
the literature [22], [26], [52], [53], [54] (see also Table 5).
From the EEG signals, power spectral features were
extracted. The logarithms of the spectral power from theta
(4-8 Hz), slow alpha (8-10 Hz), alpha (8-12 Hz), beta
(12-30 Hz), and gamma (30+ Hz) bands were extracted from
all 32 electrodes as features. In addition to power spectral
features, the difference between the spectral power of all the
symmetrical pairs of electrodes on the right and left
hemisphere was extracted to measure the possible asym-
metry in the brain activities due to emotional stimuli. The
total number of EEG features of a trial for 32 electrodes is
216. Table 5 summarizes the list of features extracted from
the physiological signals.
6.2
MCA Features
Music videos were encoded into the MPEG-1 format to
extract motion vectors and I-frames for further feature
extraction. The video stream has been segmented at the shot
level using the method proposed in [55].
From a movie director’s point of view, lighting key [30]
[56] and color variance [30] are important tools to evoke
emotions. We therefore extracted lighting key from frames
in the HSV space by multiplying the average value V (in
HSV) by the standard deviation of the values V (in HSV).
Color variance was obtained in the CIE LUV color space by
computing the determinant of the covariance matrix of L,
U, and V.
Hanjalic and Xu [29] showed the relationship between
video rhythm and affect. The average shot change rate and
shot length variance were extracted to characterize video
rhythm. Fast moving scenes or objects’ movements in
consecutive frames are also an effective factor for evoking
excitement. To measure this factor, the motion component
was defined as the amount of motion in consecutive frames
computed by accumulating magnitudes of motion vectors
for all B and P-frames.
Colors and their proportions are important parameters to
elicit emotions [57]. A 20-bin color histogram of hue and
lightness values in the HSV space was computed for each
I-frame and subsequently averaged over all frames. The
resulting bin averages were used as video content-based
features. The median of the L value in HSL space was
computed to obtain the median lightness of a frame.
Finally, visual cues representing shadow proportion,
visual excitement, grayness, and details were also deter-
mined according to the definition given in [30].
Sound also has an important impact on affect. For
example, loudness of speech (energy) is related to evoked
arousal, while rhythm and average pitch in speech signals
are related to valence [58]. The audio channels of the videos
were extracted and encoded into mono MPEG-3 format at a
sampling rate of 44.1 kHz. All audio signals were normalized
KOELSTRA ET AL.: DEAP: A DATABASE FOR EMOTION ANALYSIS USING PHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNALS
27
TABLE 5
Features Extracted from EEG and Physiological Signals


## Page 11

to the same amplitude range before further processing. A
total of 53 low-level audio features were determined for each
of the audio signals. These features, listed in Table 6, are
commonly used in audio and speech processing and audio
classification [59], [60]. MFCC, formants, and the pitch of
audio signals were extracted using the PRAAT software
package [61].
6.3
Fusion of Single-Modality Results
Fusion of the multiple modalities explained above aims at
improving classification results by exploiting the comple-
mentary nature of different modalities. In general, ap-
proaches for modality fusion can be classified into two
broad categories, namely, feature fusion (or early integra-
tion) and decision fusion (or late integration) [63]. In
feature fusion, the features extracted from signals of
different modalities are concatenated to form a composite
feature vector and then input to a recognizer. In decision
fusion, on the other hand, each modality is processed
independently by the corresponding classifier and the
outputs of the classifiers are combined to yield the final
result. Each approach has its own advantages. For
example, implementing a feature fusion-based system is
straightforward, while a decision fusion-based system can
be constructed by using existing unimodal classification
systems. Moreover, feature fusion can consider synchro-
nous characteristics of the involved modalities, whereas
decision fusion allows us to model asynchronous char-
acteristics of the modalities flexibly.
An important advantage of decision fusion over feature
fusion is that since each of the signals is processed and
classified independently in decision fusion, it is relatively
easy to employ an optimal weighting scheme to adjust the
relative amount of the contribution of each modality to the
final decision according to the reliability of the modality.
The weighting scheme used in our work can be formalized
as follows: For a given test datum X, the classification result
of the fusion system is
c ¼ arg max
i
Y
M
m¼1
PiðXjmÞm
(
)
;
ð4Þ
where M is the number of modalities considered for fusion,
m is the classifier for the mth modality, and PiðXjmÞ is its
output for the ith class. The weighting factors m, which
satisfy 0  m  1 and PM
m¼1 m ¼ 1, determine how much
each modality contributes to the final decision and
represents the modality’s reliability.
We adopt a simple method where the weighting factors
are fixed once their optimal values are determined from the
training data. The optimal weight values are estimated by
exhaustively searching the regular grid space, where each
weight is incremented from 0 to 1 by 0.01 and the weighting
values producing the best classification results for the
training data are selected.
6.4
Results and Discussion
Table 7 shows the average accuracies and F1-scores
(average F1-score for both classes) over participants for
each modality and each rating scale. We compare the
results to the expected values (analytically determined) of
voting randomly, voting according to the majority class in
the training data, and voting for each class with the
probability of its occurrence in the training data. For
determining the expected values of majority voting and
class ratio voting, we used the class ratio of each
participant’s feedback during the experiment. These results
are slightly too high as, in reality, the class ratio would
have to be estimated from the training set in each fold of
the leave-one-out cross validation.
Voting according to the class ratio gives an expected
F1-score of 0.5 for each participant. To test for significance,
an independent one-sample t-test was performed, compar-
ing the F1-distribution over participants to the 0.5 baseline.
As can be seen from the table, eight out of the nine F1-scores
obtained are significantly better than the class ratio baseline.
The exception is the classification of liking using EEG
signals (p ¼ 0:068). When voting according to the majority
class, relatively high accuracies are achieved, due to the
imbalanced classes. However, this voting scheme also has
the lowest F1-scores.
Overall, classification using the MCA features fares
significantly better than EEG and peripheral (p < 0:0001
for both), while EEG and peripheral scores are not
significantly different (p ¼ 0:41) (tested using a two-sided
repeated samples t-test over the concatenated results from
each rating scale and participant).
The modalities can be seen to perform moderately
complementarily, where EEG scores best for arousal,
peripheral for valence, and MCA for liking. Of the different
28
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AFFECTIVE COMPUTING,
VOL. 3,
NO. 1,
JANUARY-MARCH 2012
TABLE 6
Low-Level Features Extracted from Audio Signals
TABLE 7
Average Accuracies (ACC) and F1-Scores (F1, Average of
Score for Each Class) over Participants
Stars indicate whether the F1-score distribution over subjects is
significantly higher than 0.5 according to an independent one-sample
t-test ( ¼ p < 0:01,  ¼ p < 0:05). For comparison, expected results
are given for classification based on random voting, voting according to
the majority class, and voting with the ratio of the classes.


## Page 12

rating scales, valence classification performed best, fol-
lowed by liking, and, last, arousal.
Table 8 gives the results of multimodal fusion. Two
fusion methods were employed: the method described in
Section 6.3 and the basic method where each modality is
weighed equally. The best results were obtained when only
the two best-performing modalities were considered.
Though fusion generally outperforms the single modalities,
it is only significant for the case of MCA, PER weighted
equally in the valence scale (p ¼ 0:025).
While the results presented are significantly higher than
random classification, there remains much room for
improvement. Signal noise, individual physiological differ-
ences, and limited quality of self-assessments make single-
trial classification challenging.
7
CONCLUSION
In this work, we have presented a database for the
analysis of spontaneous emotions. The database contains
physiological signals of 32 participants (and frontal face
video of 22 participants), where each participant watched
and rated their emotional response to 40 music videos
along the scales of arousal, valence, and dominance as well
as their liking of and familiarity with the videos. We
presented a novel semi-automatic stimuli selection method
using affective tags, which was validated by an analysis of
the ratings participants gave during the experiment.
Significant correlates were found between the participant
ratings and EEG frequencies. Single-trial classification was
performed for the scales of arousal, valence, and liking
using features extracted from the EEG, peripheral, and
MCA modalities. The results were shown to be signifi-
cantly better than random classification. Finally, decision
fusion of these results yielded a modest increase in the
performance, indicating at least some complementarity to
the modalities.
The database is made publicly available and it is our
hope that other researchers will try their methods and
algorithms on this highly challenging database.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The research leading to these results has been performed in
the frameworks of European Community’s 17th Framework
Program (FP7/2007-2011) under grant agreement no. 216444
(PetaMedia). Furthermore, the authors gratefully acknowl-
edge the support of the BrainGain Smart Mix Programme of
the Netherlands Ministry of Economic Affairs, the Nether-
lands Ministry of Education, Culture, and Science and the
Swiss National Foundation for Scientific Research and the
NCCR Interactive Multimodal Information Management
(IM2). The authors also thank Sebastian Schmiedeke and
Pascal Kelm at the Technische Universita¨t Berlin for
performing the shot boundary detection on this data set.
REFERENCES
[1]
M.K. Shan, F.F. Kuo, M.F. Chiang, and S.Y. Lee, “Emotion-Based
Music Recommendation by Affinity Discovery from Film Music,”
Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 7666-7674, May
2009.
[2]
M. Tkalcic, U. Burnik, and A. Kosir, “Using Affective Parameters
in a Content-Based Recommender System for Images,” User
Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, vol. 20, pp. 1-33-33, Sept.
2010.
[3]
J.J.M. Kierkels, M. Soleymani, and T. Pun, “Queries and Tags in
Affect-Based Multimedia Retrieval,” Proc. IEEE Int’l Conf. Multi-
media and Expo, pp. 1436-1439, 2009.
[4]
M. Soleymani, J. Lichtenauer, T. Pun, and M. Pantic, “A
Multi-Modal
Database
for
Affect
Recognition
and
Implicit
Tagging,” IEEE Trans. Affective Computing, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 42-
55, Jan.-Mar. 2012.
[5]
A. Savran, K. Ciftci, G. Chanel, J.C. Mota, L.H. Viet, B. Sankur, L.
Akarun, A. Caplier, and M. Rombaut, “Emotion Detection in the
Loop from Brain Signals and Facial Images,” Proc. eNTERFACE,
July 2006.
[6]
P. Ekman, W.V. Friesen, M. O’Sullivan, A. Chan, I. Diacoyanni-
Tarlatzis, K. Heider, R. Krause, W.A. LeCompte, T. Pitcairn, and
P.E. Ricci-Bitti, “Universals and Cultural Differences in the
Judgments of Facial Expressions of Emotion,” J. Personality and
Social Psychology, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 712-717, Oct. 1987.
[7]
W.G. Parrott, Emotions in Social Psychology: Essential Readings.
Psychology Press, 2001.
[8]
R. Plutchik, “The Nature of Emotions,” Am. Scientist, vol. 89,
p. 344, 2001.
[9]
J.A. Russell, “A Circumplex Model of Affect,” J. Personality and
Social Psychology, vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 1161-1178, 1980.
[10] M.M. Bradley and P.J. Lang, “Measuring Emotion: The Self-
Assessment Manikin and the Semantic Differential,” J. Behavior
Therapy Experimental Psychiatry, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 49-59, Mar. 1994.
[11] M. Pantic, M. Valstar, R. Rademaker, and L. Maat, “Web-Based
Database for Facial Expression Analysis,” Proc. Int’l Conf. Multi-
media and Expo, pp. 317-321, 2005.
[12] E. Douglas-Cowie, R. Cowie, and M. Schro¨der, “A New Emotion
Database: Considerations, Sources and Scope,” Proc. Int’l Symp.
Computer Architecture, pp. 39-44, 2000.
[13] H. Gunes and M. Piccardi, “A Bimodal Face and Body Gesture
Database for Automatic Analysis of Human Nonverbal Affective
Behavior,” Proc. 18th Int’l Conf. Pattern Recognition, vol. 1, pp. 1148-
1153, 2006.
[14] G. Fanelli, J. Gall, H. Romsdorfer, T. Weise, and L. Van Gool, “A
3-D Audio-Visual Corpus of Affective Communication,” IEEE
Trans. Multimedia, vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 591-598, Oct. 2010.
[15] M. Grimm, K. Kroschel, and S. Narayanan, “The Vera am Mittag
German Audio-Visual Emotional Speech Database,” Proc. Int’l
Conf. Multimedia and Expo, pp. 865-868, 2008.
[16] J.A. Healey, “Wearable and Automotive Systems for Affect
Recognition from Physiology,” PhD dissertation, MIT, 2000.
[17] J.A. Healey and R.W. Picard, “Detecting Stress during Real-World
Driving Tasks Using Physiological Sensors,” IEEE Trans. Intelligent
Transportation Systems, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 156-166, June 2005.
KOELSTRA ET AL.: DEAP: A DATABASE FOR EMOTION ANALYSIS USING PHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNALS
29
TABLE 8
F1-Scores for Fusion of the Best Two Modalities and All Three Modalities Using the Equal Weights and Optimal Weights Scheme
For comparison, the F1-score for the best single modality is also given.


## Page 13

[18] P. Lang, M. Bradley, and B. Cuthbert, “International Affective
Picture
System
(IAPS):
Affective
Ratings
of
Pictures
and
Instruction Manual,” Technical Report A-8, Univ. of Florida,
2008.
[19] Z. Zeng, M. Pantic, G.I. Roisman, and T.S. Huang, “A Survey of
Affect Recognition Methods: Audio, Visual, and Spontaneous
Expressions,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 39-58, Jan. 2009.
[20] P. Lang, M. Greenwald, M. Bradely, and A. Hamm, “Looking at
Pictures—Affective, Facial, Visceral, and Behavioral Reactions,”
Psychophysiology, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 261-273, May 1993.
[21] J. Kim and E. Andre´, “Emotion Recognition Based on Physiolo-
gical Changes in Music Listening,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, vol. 30, no. 12, pp. 2067-2083, Dec. 2008.
[22] J. Wang and Y. Gong, “Recognition of Multiple Drivers’ Emotional
State,” Proc. Int’l Conf. Pattern Recognition, pp. 1-4, 2008.
[23] C.L. Lisetti and F. Nasoz, “Using Noninvasive Wearable Compu-
ters to Recognize Human Emotions from Physiological Signals,”
EURASIP J. Applied Signal Processing, vol. 2004, no. 1, pp. 1672-
1687, Jan. 2004.
[24] G. Chanel, J. Kierkels, M. Soleymani, and T. Pun, “Short-Term
Emotion Assessment in a Recall Paradigm,” Int’l J. Human-
Computer Studies, vol. 67, no. 8, pp. 607-627, Aug. 2009.
[25] J. Kierkels, M. Soleymani, and T. Pun, “Queries and Tags in
Affect-Based Multimedia Retrieval,” Proc. Int’l Conf. Multimedia
and Expo, pp. 1436-1439, June 2009.
[26] M. Soleymani, G. Chanel, J.J.M. Kierkels, and T. Pun, “Affective
Characterization of Movie Scenes Based on Content Analysis and
Physiological Changes,” Int’l J. Semantic Computing, vol. 3, no. 2,
pp. 235-254, June 2009.
[27] A. Yazdani, J.-S. Lee, and T. Ebrahimi, “Implicit Emotional
Tagging of Multimedia Using EEG Signals and Brain Computer
Interface,” Proc. SIGMM Workshop Social Media, pp. 81-88, 2009.
[28] P. Ekman, W. Friesen, M. Osullivan, A. Chan, I. Diacoyanni-
tarlatzis, K. Heider, R. Krause, W. Lecompte, T. Pitcairn, P.
Riccibitti, K. Scherer, M. Tomita, and A. Tzavaras, “Universals
and Cultural-Differences in the Judgments of Facial Expressions
of Emotion,” J. Personality and Social Psychology, vol. 53, no. 4,
pp. 712-717, Oct. 1987.
[29] A. Hanjalic and L.-Q. Xu, “Affective Video Content Representa-
tion and Modeling,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 143-
154, Feb. 2005.
[30] H.L. Wang and L.-F. Cheong, “Affective Understanding in Film,”
IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, vol. 16, no. 6,
pp. 689-704, June 2006.
[31] M. Soleymani, J. Kierkels, G. Chanel, and T. Pun, “A Bayesian
Framework for Video Affective Representation,” Proc. Int’l Conf.
Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction, pp. 1-7, Sept. 2009.
[32] D. Liu, “Automatic Mood Detection from Acoustic Music Data,”
Proc. Int’l Conf. Music Information Retrieval, pp. 13-17, 2003.
[33] L. Lu, D. Liu, and H.-J. Zhang, “Automatic Mood Detection and
Tracking of Music Audio Signals,” IEEE Trans. Audio, Speech, and
Language Processing, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 5-18, Jan. 2006.
[34] Y.-H. Yang and H.H. Chen, “Music Emotion Ranking,” Proc. Int’l
Conf. Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, pp. 1657-1660, 2009.
[35] S. Koelstra, A. Yazdani, M. Soleymani, C. Mu¨hl, J.-S. Lee, A.
Nijholt, T. Pun, T. Ebrahimi, and I. Patras, “Single Trial
Classification of EEG and Peripheral Physiological Signals for
Recognition of Emotions Induced by Music Videos,” Proc. Brain
Informatics, pp. 89-100, 2010.
[36] M.E. Tipping, “Sparse Bayesian Learning and the Relevance
Vector Machine,” J. Machine Learning Research, vol. 1, pp. 211-244,
June 2001.
[37] J.D. Morris, “SAM: The Self-Assessment Manikin an Efficient
Cross-Cultural Measurement of Emotional Response,” J. Advertis-
ing Research, vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 63-68, 1995.
[38] M. Bradley and P. Lang, “International Affective Digitized
Sounds (IADS): Stimuli, Instruction Manual and Affective
Ratings,” Technical Report B-2, The Center for Research in
Psychophysiology, Univ. of Florida, 1999.
[39] N. Lazar, “Combining Brains: A Survey of Methods for Statistical
Pooling of Information,” NeuroImage, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 538-550,
June 2002.
[40] T.M. Loughin, “A Systematic Comparison of Methods for
Combining p-Values from Independent Tests,” Computational
Statistics and Data Analysis, vol. 47, pp. 467-485, 2004.
[41] R.J. Barry, A.R. Clarke, S.J. Johnstone, C.A. Magee, and J.A.
Rushby, “EEG Differences between Eyes-Closed and Eyes-Open
Resting Conditions,” Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 118, no. 12,
pp. 2765-2773, Dec. 2007.
[42] R.J. Barry, A.R. Clarke, S.J. Johnstone, and C.R. Brown, “EEG
Differences in Children between Eyes-Closed and Eyes-Open
Resting Conditions,” Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 120, no. 10,
pp. 1806-1811, Oct. 2009.
[43] W. Klimesch, P. Sauseng, and S. Hanslmayr, “EEG Alpha
Oscillations: The Inhibition-Timing Hypothesis,” Brain Research
Rev., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 63-88, Jan. 2007.
[44] H. Cole and W.J. Ray, “EEG Correlates of Emotional Tasks Related
to Attentional Demands,” Int’l J. Psychophysiology, vol. 3, no. 1,
pp. 33-41, July 1985.
[45] J. Onton and S. Makeig, “High-Frequency Broadband Modula-
tions of Electroencephalographic Spectra,” Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, vol. 3, 2009.
[46] I. Goncharova, D.J. McFarland, J.R. Vaughan, and J.R. Wolpaw,
“EMG Contamination of EEG: Spectral and Topographical
Characteristics,” Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 114, no. 9,
pp. 1580-1593, Sept. 2003.
[47] E. Harmon-Jones, “Clarifying the Emotive Functions of Asymme-
trical Frontal Cortical Activity,” Psychophysiology, vol. 40, no. 6,
pp. 838-848, 2003.
[48] R.R. Cornelius, The Science of Emotion. Research and Tradition in the
Psychology of Emotion. Prentice Hall, 1996.
[49] D. Sander, D. Grandjean, and K.R. Scherer, “A Systems Approach
to Appraisal Mechanisms in Emotion,” Neural Networks, vol. 18,
no. 4, pp. 317-352, 2005.
[50] R. McCraty, M. Atkinson, W. Tiller, G. Rein, and A. Watkins, “The
Effects of Emotions on Short-Term Power Spectrum Analysis of
Heart Rate Variability,” Am. J. Cardiology, vol. 76, no. 14, pp. 1089-
1093, 1995.
[51] S.D. Kreibig, “Autonomic Nervous System Activity in Emotion: A
Review,” Biological Psychology, vol. 84, no. 3, pp. 394-421, 2010.
[52] G. Chanel, J.J.M. Kierkels, M. Soleymani, and T. Pun, “Short-Term
Emotion Assessment in a Recall Paradigm,” Int’l J. Human-
Computer Studies, vol. 67, no. 8, pp. 607-627, Aug. 2009.
[53] J. Kim and E. Andre´, “Emotion Recognition Based on Physiolo-
gical Changes in Music Listening,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, vol. 30, no. 12, pp. 2067-2083, Dec. 2008.
[54] P. Rainville, A. Bechara, N. Naqvi, and A.R. Damasio, “Basic
Emotions Are Associated with Distinct Patterns of Cardiorespira-
tory Activity.” Int’l J. Psychophysiology, vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 5-18, July
2006.
[55] P. Kelm, S. Schmiedeke, and T. Sikora, “Feature-Based Video Key
Frame Extraction for Low Quality Video Sequences,” Proc. Int’l
Workshop Image Analysis for Multimedia Interactive Services, pp. 25-
28, May 2009.
[56] Z. Rasheed, Y. Sheikh, and M. Shah, “On the Use of Computable
Features for Film Classification,” IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems
for Video Technology, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 52-64, Jan. 2005.
[57] P. Valdez and A. Mehrabian, “Effects of Color on Emotions,”
J. Experimental Psychology, vol. 123, no. 4, pp. 394-409, Dec. 1994.
[58] R.W. Picard, Affective Computing. MIT Press, Sept. 1997.
[59] D. Li, I.K. Sethi, N. Dimitrova, and T. McGee, “Classification of
General Audio Data for Content-Based Retrieval,” Pattern
Recognition Letters, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 533-544, 2001.
[60] L. Lu, H. Jiang, and H. Zhang, “A Robust Audio Classification and
Segmentation Method,” Proc. Ninth ACM Int’l Conf. Multimedia,
pp. 203-211, 2001.
[61] P. Boersma, “Praat, A System for Doing Phonetics by Computer,”
Glot Int’l, vol. 5, nos. 9/10, pp. 341-345, 2001.
[62] L. Chen, S. Gunduz, and M. Ozsu, “Mixed Type Audio
Classification with Support Vector Machine,” Proc. Int’l Conf.
Multimedia and Expo, pp. 781 -784, July 2006.
[63] J.-S. Lee and C.H. Park, “Robust Audio-Visual Speech Recognition
Based on Late Integration,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 10, no. 5,
pp. 767-779, Aug. 2008.
30
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AFFECTIVE COMPUTING,
VOL. 3,
NO. 1,
JANUARY-MARCH 2012


## Page 14

Sander Koelstra received the BSc and MSc
degrees in computer science from the Delft
University of Technology, The Netherlands, in
2006 and 2008, respectively. Currently, he is
working toward the PhD degree in the School of
Electronic Engineering and Computer Science at
Queen Mary University of London. His research
interests include the areas of brain-computer
interaction, computer vision, and pattern recogni-
tion. He is a student member of the IEEE.
Christian Mu¨hl received the MSc degree in
cognitive
science
from
the
University
of
Osnabrueck, Germany, in 2007. Since then,
he has been working on neurophysiological
mechanisms
of
cross-modal
attention.
Cur-
rently, he is working as a PhD researcher in
the
Human-Media
Interaction
group
of
the
University of Twente, The Netherlands. His
research interests include the identification of
affective states by neurophysiological signals
in various induction contexts. He is especially interested in the
differential effects of auditory and visual affective stimulation on the
activity of the brain as measured via electroencephalography.
Mohammad Soleymani received the BSc and
MSc degrees from the Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, University of Teh-
ran, in 2003 and 2006, respectively. Currently,
he is working toward the doctoral degree and is
a research assistant in the Computer Vision and
Multimedia Laboratory (CVML), Computer
Science Department, University of Geneva. His
research interests include: affective computing,
and multimedia information retrieval. He has
been coorganizing the MediaEval multimedia benchmarking initiative
since 2010. He is a student member of the IEEE.
Jong-Seok Lee received the PhD degree in
electrical engineering and computer science in
2006 from KAIST, Daejeon, Korea, where he
worked as a postdoctoral researcher and an
adjunct professor. He worked as a research
scientist in the Multimedia Signal Processing
Group
at
the
Swiss
Federal
Institute
of
Technology in Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne,
Switzerland.
Currently,
he
is
an
assistant
professor in the School of Integrated Technol-
ogy, Yonsei University, Korea. He is an author or coauthor of more
than 50 publications. His current research interests include multi-
media signal processing and multimodal human-computer interaction.
He is a member of the IEEE.
Ashkan Yazdani received the MSc degree in
electrical engineering from the University of
Tehran, Iran, in 2007. From 2006 to 2007, he
worked as a research assistant in the Brain
Signal Processing Group at the University of
Tehran on the topics of EEG-based person
identification, brain-computer interfacing, and
fMRI signal processing. Currently, he is working
toward the PhD degree in the Multimedia Signal
Processing Group, Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology in Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland. His main
research interests include EEG-based brain-computer interface systems
and biomedical signal processing.
Touradj Ebrahimi received the MSc and PhD
degrees in electrical engineering from the Swiss
Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne
(EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland, in 1989 and
1992, respectively. From 1989 to 1992, he was a
research assistant in the Signal Processing
Laboratory of EPFL. In 1990, he was a visiting
researcher in the Signal and Image Processing
Institute of the University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, California. In 1993, he was a
research engineer in the Corporate Research Laboratories of Sony
Corporation in Tokyo. In 1994, he served as a research consultant at
AT&T Bell Laboratories. Currently, he is working as a professor heading
the Multimedia Signal Processing Group at EPFL, where he is involved
with various aspects of digital video and multimedia applications. He is
the coauthor of more than 100 papers and holds 10 patents. He is a
member of the IEEE.
Thierry Pun received the PhD degree in image
processing for the development of a visual
prosthesis for the blind in 1982 from the Swiss
Federal Institute of Technology, Lausanne,
Switzerland. He is head of the Computer Vision
and Multimedia Laboratory, Computer Science
Department, University of Geneva, Switzerland.
He was a visiting fellow from 1982 to 1985 at the
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Mary-
land. After being a CERN fellow from 1985 to
1986 in Geneva, Switzerland, he joined the University of Geneva in
1986, where he is currently a full professor in the Computer Science
Department. He has authored or coauthored more than 300 full papers
as well as eight patents. His current research interests include affective
computing and multimodal interaction, concern: physiological signals
analysis for emotion assessment and brain-computer interaction,
multimodal interfaces for blind users, data hiding, and multimedia
information retrieval systems. He is a member of the IEEE.
Anton Nijholt is a full professor of human media
interaction at the University of Twente (NL). He
has coorganized many conferences (e.g., IVA
2009 and ACII 2009) and satellite workshops
(e.g., on affective brain-computer interfacing)
and has been the guest editor of many journals
for special issues devoted to selections of
updates of papers from these conferences and
workshops. His main research interests include
multimodal interaction, brain-computer interfa-
cing, virtual humans, affective computing, and entertainment computing.
He is a member of the IEEE.
Ioannis (Yiannis) Patras received the PhD
degree from the Department of Electrical En-
gineering, Delft University of Technology, The
Netherlands, in 2001. He is a senior lecturer in
computer vision in the School of Electronic
Engineering and Computer Science at Queen
Mary University of London. He is/has been on the
organizing committee of IEEE SMC 2004, Face
and Gesture Recognition 2008, ICMR2011, ACM
Multimedia 2013, and was the general chair of
WIAMIS 2009. He is working as an associate editor on the Image and
Vision Computing Journal. His research interests include the areas of
computer vision and pattern recognition, with emphasis on human
sensing and its applications in multimedia retrieval and multimodal
human-computer interaction. Currently, he is interested in brain-
computer interfaces and the analysis of facial and body gestures. He
is a senior member of the IEEE.
. For more information on this or any other computing topic,
please visit our Digital Library at www.computer.org/publications/dlib.
KOELSTRA ET AL.: DEAP: A DATABASE FOR EMOTION ANALYSIS USING PHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNALS
31
