SYSTEMATIC REVIEW
Open Access
© The Author(s) 2024. Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, 
sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and 
the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included 
in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. The 
Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available 
in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.
Guo et al. BMC Psychology           (2024) 12:95 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40359-024-01581-4
BMC Psychology
*Correspondence:
Bin Li
libin@bbmc.edu.cn
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
Abstract
Background  There is a mutual influence between emotions and diseases. Thus, the subject of emotions has gained 
increasing attention.
Objective  The primary objective of this study was to conduct a comprehensive review of the developments in 
emotion recognition technology over the past decade. This review aimed to gain insights into the trends and real-
world effects of emotion recognition technology by examining its practical applications in different settings, including 
hospitals and home environments.
Methods  This study followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews (PRISMA) guidelines and included 
a search of 4 electronic databases, namely, PubMed, Web of Science, Google Scholar and IEEE Xplore, to identify 
eligible studies published between 2013 and 2023. The quality of the studies was assessed using the Critical Appraisal 
Skills Programme (CASP) criteria. The key information from the studies, including the study populations, application 
scenarios, and technological methods employed, was summarized and analyzed.
Results  In a systematic literature review of the 44 studies that we analyzed the development and impact of emotion 
recognition technology in the field of medicine from three distinct perspectives: “application scenarios,” “techniques 
of multiple modalities,” and “clinical applications.” The following three impacts were identified: (i) The advancement 
of emotion recognition technology has facilitated remote emotion recognition and treatment in hospital and home 
environments by healthcare professionals. (ii) There has been a shift from traditional subjective emotion assessment 
methods to multimodal emotion recognition methods that are grounded in objective physiological signals. This 
technological progress is expected to enhance the accuracy of medical diagnosis. (iii) The evolving relationship 
between emotions and disease throughout diagnosis, intervention, and treatment processes holds clinical 
significance for real-time emotion monitoring.
Conclusion  These findings indicate that the integration of emotion recognition technology with intelligent 
devices has led to the development of application systems and models, which provide technological support for 
the recognition of and interventions for emotions. However, the continuous recognition of emotional changes in 
dynamic or complex environments will be a focal point of future research.
Development and application of emotion 
recognition technology — a systematic 
literature review
Runfang Guo1,2, Hongfei Guo4, Liwen Wang2, Mengmeng Chen3, Dong Yang2 and Bin Li1,2*
Page 2 of 15
Guo et al. BMC Psychology           (2024) 12:95 
Introduction
Emotional expression plays a crucial role in human life 
and work. The earliest definition of “emotion” appeared 
in the writings of William James (1884), the founder of 
American psychology. He believed that emotions are 
sensations of physical change and that any emotion is 
inevitably accompanied by physiological changes, such 
as facial expressions, muscle tension, and visceral activity 
[1]. Similarly, Danish physiologist Lange (1885) presented 
a similar viewpoint: emotions are not only physiological 
states that integrate sensations, thoughts, and behaviors 
but also psychological responses generated by various 
external stimuli [2]. As a result, researchers in numer­
ous fields have recognized the importance of accurately 
identifying emotions. In recent years, research on emo­
tion recognition has been applied predominantly in fields 
such as psychology, affective computing, and clinical 
therapy.
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), 
approximately 280 million people worldwide experience 
depression, with more than 700,000 people dying from 
suicide [3]. There are many mood-related disorders, such 
as bipolar disorder (BD), which is characterized by recur­
rent episodes of alternating mania and depressive symp­
toms [4, 5]. The manic and pathological states of BD can 
also be understood as extreme expressions of basic emo­
tions such as sadness, happiness, and disgust. Emotions 
may be intentionally or unintentionally suppressed, and 
many individuals might struggle to differentiate between 
fear and anxiety and between guilt and shame, making 
it challenging for them to accurately describe complex 
emotions. Patients with mood-related disorders experi­
ence more severe emotional fluctuations than healthy 
individuals [6], which can, to some extent, reflect the pro­
gression of the disease, the risk of relapse, and impaired 
functioning [7, 8]. Therefore, the continuous monitor­
ing of emotional instability and other variables that may 
reflect disease activity (such as symptom duration, sever­
ity, and frequency) has clinical significance.
Self-monitoring is ubiquitous in the field of psychiatry 
research. Humans can describe emotions through text, 
language, or facial expressions and even reflect inter­
nal emotions through physiological signals. Emotional 
charting tools, such as the National Institute of Mental 
Health’s Life Chart Method (NIMH-LCM) [9], the Symp­
tom Checklist-90-Revised (SCL-90-R) [10], and the Pro­
file of Mood States (POMS), are often used to manage 
and monitor emotional changes [11]. Due to the sudden 
spread of COVID-19 and drastic societal changes, emo­
tions are highly susceptible to external influences and are 
closely related to behavior during the pandemic [12]. To 
reduce the transmission rate of the novel coronavirus, 
various personal protective measures and policies aimed 
at reducing gatherings may pose challenges in measuring 
emotions [13]. Therefore, simple methods such as voice 
information or facial expressions may no longer be suit­
able for emotion monitoring in psychiatry, and perhaps 
social media could serve as an important source of data 
[14, 15]. Combining emotional data with mobile phone 
movement data and linking policies with human behavior 
can reveal the immense potential of multimodal data in 
emotion detection [16].
Currently, several intelligent monitoring tools can 
provide standardized responses to language or behavior 
and help individuals understand the emotions under­
lying specific actions [17]. Advancements in wearable 
devices, mobile terminals, and the Internet of Things 
(IoT) have provided more efficient multidimensional 
applications for intelligent emotional monitoring. These 
methods, which are based on ecological momentary 
assessment techniques, play an important role in remind­
ing patients to perform self-monitoring [18]. The inte­
gration of momentary assessment and sensor data holds 
significant potential for clinical research and treatment. 
Sandstrom (2016), in the context of momentary depres­
sion and anxiety assessments, combined behavioral data 
from GPS, accelerometers, and anonymous call records 
to reveal clinically relevant psychological and behavioral 
patterns [19]. Effectively constructing an emotion clas­
sification model using neurophysiological, facial feature, 
and behavioral data recorded from portable devices, 
along with machine learning methods, showcases a novel 
research area.
This study reviews relevant literature from the past 
decade to delineate current trends and hotspots in emo­
tion recognition technology, elaborating on its practical 
applications for patients with mental/physical disorders 
in both hospital and home environments. Emotional 
monitoring during patients’ diagnosis, intervention, and 
treatment has been demonstrated to have a certain effect 
on reducing morbidity and mortality and improving 
quality of life. Our goal was to assess the importance and 
practical application of emotion recognition technology 
in the treatment of patients with psychological/physical 
illnesses in the development of psychosomatic medicine. 
The remaining structure is as follows: Sect. 2 provides a 
detailed account of the process of collecting and selecting 
articles for this review. Section  3 provides an overview 
of emotion recognition methods applied in hospitals 
and home environments, along with an analysis of their 
development. Section  4 discusses the contributions of 
emotion recognition technology to patient treatment and 
Keywords  Emotion, Recognition, Monitoring, Patients, Medical treatment
Page 3 of 15
Guo et al. BMC Psychology           (2024) 12:95 
healthcare, highlights the positive and negative impacts, 
and suggests potential future directions for this research. 
Finally, Sect. 5 offers a summary of the paper.
Material collection and research methods
Retrieval strategy
A literature review was conducted according to the 
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and 
Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines [20]. MeSH terms 
in Medline were searched. Three categories of keywords 
were preliminarily identified based on the research 
question, namely, emotion, recognition, and patients. 
Emotional-related MeSH terms such as psychology and 
mental; recognition-related MeSH terms such as express 
and survey; and patient-related MeSH terms such as 
clinical et al. were identified. Searches were conducted in 
the PubMed, Web of Science, Google Scholar, and IEEE 
Xplore databases using the Boolean operators “AND” and 
“OR” to combine keywords. Search data were recorded 
throughout the process. A review of the initially retrieved 
articles involved summarizing the index titles and key­
words, conducting a secondary collection of free terms 
in each database, and organizing free terms. The search 
scope was expanded to obtain more precise or compre­
hensive results. Three researchers conducted a one-week 
discussion in July 2023 to finalize the research topic and 
retrieval strategy. Two trained researchers screened the 
relevance of article titles and abstracts to the research 
topic, with cross-checking by another reviewer. The first 
and corresponding authors performed final full-text 
reviews of included articles and submitted the results for 
collective team discussion. The literature search results 
are shown in Table 1.
Eligibility criteria
Inclusion criteria
 	•
Papers published in English only.
 	•
Research published in 2013–2023.
 	•
Studies in which the participants were patients 
with mental or physical disorders or eligible patient 
populations were extracted from publicly available 
databases.
 	•
Articles that proposed or developed at least one 
method, model, procedure or system for emotion 
monitoring.
Exclusion criteria
 	•
Duplicate articles were retrieved from different 
databases.
 	•
Abstracts, conference minutes and reports that 
could not be obtained by searching or contacting the 
authors.
 	•
Abstracts and original articles that were not related 
to the topic of the study.
 	•
Studies that focused on emotions exhibited by 
patients in response to external stimuli rather than 
emotions identified using a certain method or 
technology.
A manual search was conducted across four databases 
(see Fig. 1). A total of 3736 articles were identified, and 
their titles and abstracts were transferred to the refer­
ence management software EndNote 20. After duplicates 
were removed (n = 502), 3234 unique studies were iden­
tified and screened using the inclusion/exclusion crite­
ria. The majority (n = 2334) of studies were excluded at 
the title and abstract screening stage, with an additional 
622 excluded during full-text screening. The documents 
excluded for other reasons included abstracts for which 
the full text could not be obtained through a search or by 
contacting authors, conference proceedings, or reports 
(n = 6); studies focusing on patients’ emotional responses 
to external stimuli (n = 221); and low-quality outcome lit­
erature based on the CASP assessment (n = 7). Finally, 44 
articles were selected for review.
Article quality evaluation tool
The Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (CASP) criteria 
were adapted from the 1994 version of the “Users’ Guides 
to the Medical Literature” published by the American 
Medical Association. In this study, the CASP criteria 
were employed to assess the quality of the studies [21]. 
The CASP criteria comprise 10 items, each with three 
response options: “yes,” “no,” and “unclear.” The greater 
the number of “Yes” responses is, the greater the qual­
ity of the literature. Based on the assessment outcomes, 
the included literature was categorized into three levels 
according to quality: high, moderate, and low. To ensure 
the quality of the systematic review, studies with low 
appraisal results (i.e., with more than 3 “no” and “unclear” 
Table 1  Retrieval strategy
Database
Retrieval type
PubMed
(i) “psychology” OR “psychic” OR “psychological” 
OR “mental” OR “mind” OR “mood” OR “senti­
ments” OR “emotion” OR “emotional” OR “feel” OR 
“affective” OR “face” OR “facial” OR “brain wave” 
OR “speech” OR “voice” OR “electroencephalo­
gram” OR “EEG” OR “electrocardiogram” OR “ECG”
(ii) “identify” OR “identification” OR “recognition” 
OR “monitor” OR “survey” OR “express” OR “per­
ception” OR “process” OR “track” OR “recognize”
(iii) “clinical” OR “patient” OR “medical treatment” 
OR “health care”
*(i) AND (ii) AND (iii)
* Results by year: 2013–2023
Google Scholar
IEEE Xplore
WOS
Page 4 of 15
Guo et al. BMC Psychology           (2024) 12:95 
responses) were excluded. The detailed CASP evaluation 
results can be found in Appendix 1.
Data extraction
Data were extracted independently by two researchers 
who were trained in data extraction, and the data were 
cross-checked by another researcher. Relevant data were 
manually extracted, including the first author’s name, 
year of publication, country of publication, title, DOI 
number, type of research, research method, purpose of 
the emotion recognition method, emotion recognition 
technology, data collection device, sample set, applica­
tion scenarios, modeling foundation, psychological/emo­
tional categories, statistical analysis method, and results.
The bias risks and types assessed in the individual stud­
ies included those proposed by the Cochrane Collabora­
tion, such as selection bias, performance bias, detection 
bias, attrition bias, reporting bias, and other biases 
[22]. Any discrepancies or uncertainties related to bias 
Fig. 1  Flow chart of research screening
 
Page 5 of 15
Guo et al. BMC Psychology           (2024) 12:95 
assessment were resolved through discussions between 
the authors and relevant experts.
Results
Among the 44 selected articles, 24 were experimental 
studies, 18 were observational studies, and 2 were mixed-
methods studies. The data from 10 articles were sourced 
from public datasets, while the data from 33 articles were 
obtained through institutional recruitment. The patient 
populations discussed in these articles included individu­
als with mental disorders (BD, autism spectrum disorder, 
depression), neurological conditions (stroke, epilepsy, 
facial paralysis, facial numbness), cancer, and genetic 
alopecia.
The primary application scenarios addressed in the 
selected articles were hospital treatment and home 
healthcare. Emotional recognition methods predomi­
nantly involve the utilization of scales, speech analy­
sis, facial features, physiological signals, or multimodal 
techniques to construct models and systems. Research 
has indicated that through clinical validation (diagnosis, 
intervention, and treatment), certain emotion monitor­
ing devices demonstrated good performance in reducing 
morbidity and mortality rates and enhancing quality of 
life [23, 24]. For a detailed overview, please refer to Fig. 2.
Application of emotion recognition methods based on 
different scenes
Twenty-seven studies focused on hospital applications, 
11 studies were conducted in outpatient or home moni­
toring settings, and the remaining 6 studies indicated 
applicability across all scenarios.
Application of emotion recognition technology in hospitals
In previous medical practices, most doctors or experts 
diagnosed patients’ emotional issues by using invasive 
devices and medical assessments. Automatic emotion 
recognition methods assist doctors not only in evaluat­
ing the overall condition of patients but also in accurately 
identifying diseases associated with emotional features 
in real time. In some studies, clinical disease features 
and emotional characteristics were combined as unique 
biomarkers that are involved in the clinical diagnostic 
process. They have also been used to assess patients’ per­
formance during treatment and to aid in implementing 
psychological intervention therapies [25, 26].
In a study involving psychiatric patients, Masulli (2022) 
introduced a data-driven eye-tracking model [25]. The 
focus of this study was on the use of a cross-diagnostic 
approach to link clinical dimensional scores with eye gaze 
behavior. A study by Quirien (2022) suggested that the 
Fig. 2  Overview of the application of emotion recognition methods
 
Page 6 of 15
Guo et al. BMC Psychology           (2024) 12:95 
regular use of the European Organization for Research 
and Treatment of Cancer Core Quality of Life question­
naire (EORTC QLQ-C30) emotional function (EF) scale 
for screening anxiety and depression symptoms in glioma 
patients contributes to the early identification of emo­
tional disorders. This practice serves as a foundation for 
referrals and treatment decisions [26]. Overall, these 
studies indicate that psychological care and interventions 
can enhance patients’ mental well-being within a clinical 
practice setting. Hence, achieving accurate and efficient 
emotion recognition and continuous monitoring is the 
initial step toward improving patients’ conditions.
Application of emotion recognition technology in home 
environments
In recent years, the development of the IoT has driven 
rapid advancements in the field of healthcare, leading 
clinical practitioners to focus on home-centered care 
models. Medical devices connected through the IoT offer 
users the opportunity to receive in-home treatment and 
rehabilitation, thereby alleviating pressure on healthcare 
systems. The application of emotional recognition meth­
ods in the “home health” domain has sparked significant 
interest among researchers. Faccio (2018) developed an 
electronic health tool based on the Family Resilience 
(FaRe) questionnaire aimed at monitoring the emotional 
state of cancer patients while at home [27]. This tool not 
only provides diagnostic criteria for physicians but also 
allows for the formulation of corresponding intervention 
measures. Veerbeek (2013) created a web-based psycho­
logical monitoring data collection system called “Moni­
toring the Mental Health of the Elderly” [28].
These systems exhibit the novelty of coordinated hard­
ware and software. Participants complete questionnaires 
or scales on smart devices at scheduled times each day 
while their sleep and behavioral activity are continuously 
monitored through devices such as pulse oximeters, cam­
eras (smart mobile devices, home surveillance devices, 
computers, etc.), and wearable devices equipped with 
sensors (e.g., tracking phone and text message usage, 
social interactions, and generated movement data). All 
these data are stored on cloud servers and fed to the 
backend in real time, facilitating easy access to medi­
cal information and monitoring services and ultimately 
reducing diagnosis time. Overall, the research indicates 
that the intelligent emotion recognition systems used in 
home environments must possess smart terminals and 
home treatment platforms.
Emotion recognition technology based on different 
patterns
Emotion recognition based on psychometric scales
Fifteen articles assessed the effectiveness of the scales for 
emotion recognition, as shown in Table 2.
Emotional chart tools can assist patients in under­
standing their medical condition, identifying warning 
signs of adverse emotional episodes and relapses, and 
describing the instability of individual emotions. Embed­
ding these scales in monitoring systems and applications 
based on momentary assessment tools can compensate 
for the limitations of traditional paper-based emotional 
chart tools due to environmental constraints. Moreover, 
retrospective reporting eliminates the impact of inaccu­
rate assessment results caused by factors such as mea­
surement outcomes, cognitive levels, and understanding 
errors, for example, low compliance and potential recall 
bias [29–31].
Tsanas (2016) [32] indicated that the Automated Moni­
toring of Symptom Severity (AMoSS) application system, 
which was embedded in smartphones and based on the 
mood zoom scale, enabled efficient, long-term, and effec­
tive daily emotional monitoring for patients with mood 
disorders. Throughout the entire process, participants 
exhibited good compliance, and the data were quantita­
tively processed and more easily preserved.
Emotion recognition based on speech
Three articles assessed the effectiveness of speech-based 
emotion recognition, as shown in Table 3.
Mel-frequency cepstral coefficients (MFCCs) have 
been widely used in speech-based emotion recognition 
[33–37]. Several studies have shown that support vector 
machine (SVM) classifiers can group multidimensional 
datasets by identifying hyperplanes. Chin KC (2021) 
used the “MFCC + SVM” approach in their research, and 
the results showed that the prediction accuracy, positive 
predictive value, negative predictive value, sensitivity, 
and specificity were 92.87%, 84.62%, 93.57%, 52.38%, and 
98.64%, respectively [38].
Furthermore, deep convolutional neural networks 
(DCNNs) group multidimensional datasets by recog­
nizing data features through recursion and iteration. 
Rejaibi (2022) tested the Distress Analysis Interview 
Corpus/Wizard-of-Oz (DAIC-WOZ) database, Ryer­
son Audio-Visual Database of Emotional Speech and 
Song (RAVDESS) dataset, and Anonymized Vid­
eos from Diverse countries (AVi-D) dataset using the 
“MFCC + DCNN” framework, achieving an overall accu­
racy of 76.27% [39]. These consistent results demonstrate 
that speech-based emotion recognition technology has 
also become an independent and viable application.
Emotion recognition based on facial expression
Twelve articles evaluated the effectiveness of facial 
expression-based emotion recognition, and the results 
are shown in Table 4.
Facial expression-based emotion recognition technol­
ogy utilizes computer vision and artificial intelligence to 
Page 7 of 15
Guo et al. BMC Psychology           (2024) 12:95 
identify a person’s psychological emotions [40]. Rapid 
and subtle microexpressions are among the most use­
ful external indicators for detecting hidden emotional 
changes. Ekman annotated static and dynamic expres­
sion in microexpression videos within the Facial Action 
Coding System (FACS) [41] (related datasets include the 
Facial Expression Recognition 2013 (FER 2013) dataset 
[42] and the Real-world Affective Faces Database (RAF-
DB) [43]).
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have the abil­
ity to rapidly capture changes in facial position and image 
scale, and they have made significant advancements in 
pattern recognition, particularly in tasks such as facial 
detection [44] and text recognition [45]. The visual 
Table 2  Overview of emotion recognition based on psychometric scale
No
Author & year
Scale Types
N
Emotions
Test sample
Application
Statistical methods
1
A. Tsanas
(2016)
MZ self-made 
questionnaire
130
Anxious, Elated, 
Sad, Angry, Irritable, 
Energetic
1BD, 2BPD patients
AMoSS Android 
application
3PCA
2
Quirien Oort
(2022)
QLQ-C30, QLQ-
BN20, HADS
99
Strain, Anxiety, De­
pression, Irritable
Grade II-IV gliomas 
patients
4NA
Spearman correlation,
Mann-Whitney U test
3
Silvia Clausi
(2014)
SCL-90-R, POMS, 
HDRS
70
Depression
Cerebellar ataxia 
patients
Mood monitoring 
equipment(MoMo)
Pearson, T-test
4
Vazquez 
Montes(2018)
ASRM, QIDS
146
Mania, Depression
BD patients
True colours 
self-management 
system
Primary analysis,
Secondary analysis
5
Faccio Flaviao(2018)
FaRe questionnaire
120
Communication 
and cohesion, 
Perceived family 
coping, Religious­
ness and spiritual­
ity, Perceived social 
support
Cancer patients
Personal health 
record system 
(named iPHR)
NA
6
Emma Incecik(2020)
QIDS-SR, WSAS
21
Depression
Depression 
patients
True colours 
self-management 
system
Topic analysis
7
McIntyre S.
(2023)
Mood disorders 
questionnaire
100
Mania, Depression
Patients of In a U.S. 
health plan
Rapid mood 
screener(RMS)
Unidirectional sensitivity 
analysis
8
Andrés 
Cárcamo(2021)
PHQ-9
6
Depression
Depression 
patients
MonDep APP
NA
9
Veerbeek M
(2013)
The dutch version 
of the national 
health outcomes 
scale 65+
836
Anxiety, Depression Older adults en­
rolled in outpatient 
mental health care
Mental health 
care monitor older 
adults (MEMO)
Descriptive statistical 
analysis
10
Barros Jorge
(2020)
OQ-45.2, STAXI-2, 
RFL, DEQ, APGAR
650
Depression, 
Suicidal tendency, 
Vulnerability
Mental health 
patients with 
symptoms of emo­
tional anxiety
NA
R statistics
11
Melbye, Sigurd 
Arne(2021)
MDI, ASRM, IPAQ, 
PSQI
206
Mania, Depression
BD patients, Unaf­
fected relatives
Monsenso self-
monitoring system
Linear mixed effects model,
Chi-square test
12
Rocamora 
Rodrigo(2021)
HADS, STAI, BDI-II
493
Anxiety, Depression Epilepsy patients
NA
Normality test, Chi-square 
test, Fisher’s exact statistics, 
T-test, Mann-whitney/ Krus­
kal-wallis test, Bonferroni
13
Dubad Muna
(2021)
Self-assessment, 
DERS-SF
47
Positive and nega­
tive emotions
Mental health 
problems
“Catch It”APP
ANOVA
14
Cruz, Breno 
Fiuza(2022)
PANSS, CDSS, FERT-
100, BACS
193
Depression
Schizophrenia 
patients
NA
Kolmogorov-smirnov, Pear­
son, Spearman, Student’s/
Mann-whitney U test, χ2 
test, Cronbach, Multiple 
linear regression analysis
15
Gangeri Laura(2022)
Cancer patient 
pandemic emotion 
questionnaire
341
NA
Cancer patients
NA
5EFA, 6CFA
1BD:Borderline Disorder; 2BPD:Borderline Personality Disorder; 3PCA: Principal Component Analysis; 4NA:Not Applicable; 5EFA: Exploratory Factorial Analysis; 6CFA: 
Confirmatory Factor Analyses
Page 8 of 15
Guo et al. BMC Psychology           (2024) 12:95 
transformer (ViT) is a powerful artificial intelligence 
technology capable of recognizing or classifying objects 
within images [46, 47]. As the algorithmic performance of 
ViT has continued to improve and advance, it has gradu­
ally outperformed CNNs on small- and medium-sized 
image classification datasets [41, 48]. Jiayu Ye (2022) pro­
posed a depression vision transformer (Dep-ViT) model 
to address the facial expression recognition problem in 
patients with depression. Compared to four other excel­
lent models (the deep-emotion, ResNet, SCN, and ViT 
models), the Dep-ViT model achieved the highest accu­
racy [49].
Table 3  Overview of emotion recognition based on speech
No
Author & year
Feature extraction
N
Emotions
Test sample
Pattern recog­
nition methods
Accu­
racy
1
Chin, Kuan-
Chen (2021)
1MFCC
337
Stability, 
Unstable
Scheduling records of out-of-
hospital cardiac arrest
SVM
92.87%
2
Ning JIA (2021)
Speed of speech, short-term averagy 
anegy, pitch frequence, MFCC
NA
Depression
AVi-D dataset
2GAN, 3CNN
67%
3
Rejaibi, Emna 
(2022)
Spectral, Cepstral, Glottis,Prosodic, 
Voice Quality, MFCC
NA
Depression
DAIC-WOZ dataset, RAVDESS 
dataset, AVi-D dataset
4DL
76.27%
1MFCC: Mel Frequency Cepstrum Coefficient; 2GAN: Generative Adversarial Network; 3CNN: Convolutional Neural Networks; 4DL: Deep Learning
Table 4  Overview of emotion recognition based on facial expression
No
Author & year
Feature 
extraction
N
Emotions
Test sample
Pattern recognition 
methods
Accuracy
1
Madrigal Garcia 
(2018)
Facial image
34
Sadness, Fear
Patients at risk of clini­
cal deterioration
Pearson, Chi-square 
test, T-test, Cluster 
analysis, 1LR
NA
2
Xin Chen (2019)
Facial image
49
NA
Inpatients
CNN
Training is 92%, 
Test is 83%
3
Isabelle Chiu 
(2015)
Facial stimulation 49
Anger, Disgust, Fear, Happiness, 
Sadness, Astonished
Healthy individuals 
aged between 52 
and 79
2GLMM
NA
4
Kowallik Andrea E 
(2021)
Facial action unit
55
Anger, Disgust, Fear, Happiness, 
Sadness, Astonished
Patients with different 
degrees of autism
Multinomial Logistic 
Regression Algorithm
F(1, 53)= 2.428, 
p = 0.125, 
ηp2 = 0.044
5
Onyema, Edeh 
Michael (2021)
Facial image
NA
Anger, Disgust, Fear, Happiness, 
Sadness, Astonished, Neutral
FER 2013 dataset
CNN
70%
6
Masulli Paolo 
(2022)
Eye tracking data 111
Autism, Depression, Attention 
deficit
Psychiatric 
outpatients
PCA, Linear 
regression
NA
7
Parra-Dominguez 
(2022)
Eyebrows, eyes, 
mouth (angle, 
slope, Euclidean 
distance, perim­
eter of a closed 
shape)
120
NA
MEEI database
5-fold cross valida­
tion, 3ANN
90.25%
8
Toshiya Akiyama 
(2022)
Facial action unit 
and image
71
Anger, Disgust, Fear, Happiness, 
Sadness, Astonished, Neutral
Schizophrenics
Multi-task CNN
66.29%
9
Jiayu Ye (2022)
Facial action unit 
and image
164
Anger, Disgust, Fear, Happiness, 
Sadness, Astonished, Neutral
Depression patients
Spearman correlation 
analysis, Random 
forest, 4LR-RFE
41.7%
10
Muhammad Mun­
sif (2022)
Facial image
70
Normal, Happy, Angry, sad
KEDF dataset
CNN
Training is 96%, 
Test is 97%
11
Kuttenreich, Anna-
Maria (2022)
Facial image
60
Anger, Disgust, Fear, Happiness, 
Sadness, Astonished
Patients with facial 
linkage after paralysis
NA
FER accuracy 
67.7 ± 11.3%, 
AER accuracy 
67.7 ± 11.3%
12
Yiming Fan (2022)
Facial image
84
Anger, Pain, Tension, Happiness, 
Sadness, Astonished, Fatigue, 
Neutral
RAF-DB dataset, 
FER + dataset, Private 
dataset of stroke 
patients
CNN
FER+:88.21%, 
RAF-DB:89.44%, 
private datas­
ets 99.81%
1LR: Logistic Regression; 2GLMM: Generalized Linear Mixed Model; 3ANN: Artificial Neural Network; 4LR-RFE: Recursive Feature Elimination based on Logistic 
Regression
Page 9 of 15
Guo et al. BMC Psychology           (2024) 12:95 
Emotion recognition based on physiological signals
Three articles assessed the effectiveness of emotion rec­
ognition based on physiological signals, and the results 
are shown in Table 5.
Physiological signals can provide a relatively objective 
reflection of an individual’s emotional state, increas­
ing the accuracy of emotion recognition systems based 
on physiological signals. These physiological signals 
include galvanic skin response (GSR) signals, electro­
myographic (EMG) signals, electroencephalogram (EEG) 
signals, heart rate, and respiration, among others. In 
their research, Verma Aakash (2018) developed an emo­
tion recognition wearable system based on Arduino for 
individuals with behavioral disorders [50]. This system 
measures skin conductivity using a GSR sensor and skin 
transparency using a pulse sensor and provides real-time 
heart rate data.
Gentili’s (2016) research indicated that combining 
physiological parameters with behavioral data allows for 
more accurate identification of subtle emotional changes 
[51]. Compared to changes in speech and facial expres­
sions, the rhythmic variations in behavioral data are 
more representative. At present, the available physiologi­
cal signal data are limited, and it is necessary to establish 
a complete and high-quality physiological signal database 
and to explore emotion models based on cognitive mech­
anisms combined with physiological signals.
Emotion recognition based on multimodality
Ten articles assessed the effectiveness of multimodal 
emotion recognition, and the results are shown in 
Table 6.
In previous research, most emotion recognition tech­
nologies relied primarily on single modalities and lacked 
multiple-dimensional parameters. An increasing number 
of studies are developing more comprehensive and opti­
mized emotion recognition systems by incorporating 
various forms of data, such as psychometric question­
naire, audio signal, facial expression, EEG, and electro­
cardiogram (ECG) data. Hossain (2016) achieved a high 
recognition rate of 99.4% in a patient emotion recogni­
tion system based on a Gaussian mixture model (GMM) 
by combining facial expressions and audio signals [52]. In 
Yuying Tong’s (2020) work, a method that combines EEG 
and facial expression features to identify the emotions of 
patients with depression was proposed. This research val­
idated the effectiveness of facial expression classification 
for different emotions in patients with depression and 
showed significant accuracy through repeated measure­
ments [53].
Different clinical applications of emotion recognition
Emotional recognition technology has various applica­
tions in the clinical field, positively impacting clinical 
research and leading to precise diagnoses, interventions, 
and treatments, with the potential to enhance patients’ 
mental health and treatment outcomes. The results are 
summarized in Table 7.
Modern healthcare and nursing prioritize not only fun­
damental medical treatment but also psychological ther­
apy. Clinical practitioners and healthcare professionals 
utilize extensive emotional monitoring data to facilitate 
their understanding of clinical outcomes. Research indi­
cates that rapid psychological diagnostic results can be 
obtained through smart applications and instantaneous 
assessment techniques [54, 55]. This not only addresses 
the challenges faced by patients who must travel long dis­
tances for medical consultations but also streamlines the 
medical consultation process.
Clinical doctors can use emotional monitoring data to 
formulate coping strategies and relapse prevention plans. 
Research has shown that through self-monitoring and 
labeling emotional behaviors, patients can gain a better 
understanding of their emotions and take measures to 
prevent more severe emotional issues, thereby improving 
their mental health outcomes [56].
Discussion
In the past decade, the field of intelligent emotion recog­
nition has attracted the interest of numerous researchers, 
leading to the development of various methods based on 
single or multimodal approaches to effectively identify 
patients’ emotional states. The recognition of patients’ 
emotions plays a crucial role in healthcare, including in 
psychological counseling [57], anxiety and stress assess­
ments [28], and pain assessments [52].
Table 5  Overview of emotion recognition based on physiological signals
No
Author & year
Feature extraction
N
Emotions
Test 
sample
Pattern recognition methods
Accuracy
1
Prima Dewi Purnama­
sari (2015)
Relative wavelet 
energy, EEG
72
1HAHV, 2LAHV, 3LALV, 
4HALV
Patients
Back propagation neural network
92.03%
2
Claudio Gentili (2016)
ECG
8
Mania, Depression
BD 
patients
SVM
Friedman test
68.57 ± 8.01%
3
Verma, Aakash (2018)
Skin conductivity, 
heart rate
NA
Happiness, Sadness, 
Anger, Neutrality
Patients
NA
NA
1HAHV: High Arousal High Valence; 2LAHV: Low Arousal High Valence; 3LALV: Low Arousal Low Valence; 4HALV: High Arousal Low Valence
Page 10 of 15
Guo et al. BMC Psychology           (2024) 12:95 
Evaluation of the application of emotion recognition 
methods
A comprehensive intelligent healthcare system enables 
patients to receive real-time condition monitoring, timely 
diagnosis and effective treatment. Through intelligent 
devices based on cloud computing and the IoT, patients’ 
emotions can be rapidly and accurately identified, with 
notifications sent to healthcare professionals to ensure 
patient safety. In addition, cloud data centers can provide 
data storage services, data analysis, and audiovisual data 
processing. These patients offer secure access to health­
care professionals when they need to evaluate patients’ 
emotional states [58]. Emotion recognition has evolved 
from initially targeting patients with mental disorders 
(such as depression and BD) to encompassing patients 
with neurological conditions (such as cerebrovascu­
lar diseases, peripheral neuropathies, and spinal cord 
lesions). The most extensively studied applications of 
emotion recognition in these patients are among patients 
with conditions such as epilepsy, stroke, facial paralysis, 
facial numbness, and coma. The common feature of 
such patients is that they cannot express real emotions 
through objective external features (such as language and 
facial expressions) and autonomous behaviors. Therefore, 
it is necessary to design an automated system to effec­
tively detect the emotions of such patients.
Methods based on neural networks and facial fea­
tures have shown good performance in recognizing the 
emotions of patients with facial paralysis and are highly 
valuable in the medical field [59]. Furthermore, it is 
important for healthcare professionals to consider dis­
ease severity, as the extent of organ damage can affect 
the ability to recognize emotions and feelings. Research­
ers strive to ensure that any recognition system can iden­
tify these behaviors effectively. In addition to identifying 
basic emotions (anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness, 
and surprise), it is important to consider the intensity of 
these emotions. This understanding can help healthcare 
professionals anticipate patients’ concerns and stress lev­
els, facilitating appropriate treatment. EEG research has 
Table 6  Overview of emotion recognition based on multimodality
No
Author & year
Feature extraction
N
Emotions
Test sample
Pattern recognition 
methods
Accuracy
1
M. Shamim Hos­
sain (2016)
Video, Audio
100
Pain, Tension, 
Normal
College 
students
GMM
99.4%
2
Amico F (2016)
1ERP, GSR, 2HRV, facial emotion 
and degree of pupil dilation
48
Fear, Sadness, Joy, 
Anger, Disgust, 
Surprise
Depression 
patients, BD 
patients, BPD 
patients
NA
NA
3
Gillian M. Sand­
strom (2016)
Self-report, psychological, 
daily behavior
NA
Mania, Depression
BD patients
Mean, Standard deviation, 
Friedman test, SVM
NA
4
Xinfang Ding 
(2019)
EEG, eye tracking informa­
tion, GSR
348
Depression
3MDD patients Chi-square test, T test, Ran­
dom forest, LR, SVM
Accuracy is 79.63%
Precision is 76.67%
5
Bai Ran (2021)
Clinician rating scale, Sself-
rating scale, telephone usage 
data, sleep data, step data
334
Steady-remission, 
Steady-depressed, 
Swing-drastic, 
Swing-moderate
MDD patients
SVM, KNN, DT, Naïve bayes, 
RF, LR
Steady-depressed: 
84.27%
Swing-drastic: 
85.33%
6
Geerling B 
(2021)
Graphical representation of 
mood swings, online monitor­
ing of sleep
17
NA
BD patients
4LCM
NA
7
Haiyun Huang 
(2021)
Behavior scale, EEG, pupillary 
response, gaze distance
18
Happiness, Anger, 
Sadness
Disturbance of 
consciousnes
Spectral turbulence mea­
surement, SVM-RFE
91.5 ± 6.34%
8
Mano, Leandro 
Y (2016)
Images, physiological signals
NA
Neutrality, Happi­
ness, Sadness, Fear, 
Anger, Surprise
Extended 
Cohn-Kanade 
(CK+) dataset
T test, Wilcoxon rank sum 
test, 5KNN, 6DT, Fuzzy logic, 
Bayesian network, SVM
99.75%
9
Yuying Tong 
(2020)
HRSD, HAMA, EEG, facial 
expression
50
Depression
Depression 
patients
Three-factor repeated mea­
surement variance analysis
Happy: 
87.68 ± 7.50%
Neu­
tral:82.87 ± 10.14%
Sad: 75.06 ± 13.32%
10
Yulong Li (2021)
SAS, SDS, HAMD, EEG
54
Depression
Androgen 
alopecia 
patients
FAW-FS algorithm, ANOVA, 
Mutual information, χ2 test, 
LR, DT, KNN, SVM, 7RF
LR: 80.87%
DT: 79.24%
KNN: 80.42%
SVM: 83.07%
RF: 81.45%
1ERP: Event-Related Potentials; 2HRV: Heart Rate Variability; 3MDD: Major Depressive Disorder;4LCM: Life Cycle Management; 5KNN: K-Nearest Neighbors; 6DT: 
Decision Trees; 7RF: Random Forest
Page 11 of 15
Guo et al. BMC Psychology           (2024) 12:95 
Table 7  Overview of emotion recognition applications
No
First author
Application 
scenario
Type of disease
Sam­
ple 
size
Auxiliary 
diagnosis
Treat
In­
ter­
vene
1
M. Shamim Hossain
hospital or home
NA
100
✓
×
×
2
A. Tsanas
home
BD
130
✓
×
×
3
Madrigal Garcia
hospital
Patients in severe or critical condition
34
✓
×
×
4
Quirien Oort
hospital
Glioma
99
✓
×
×
5
Xin Chen
hospital
Inpatients
49
✓
×
×
6
Amico F
hospital
Depression, BD and borderline personality disorder
48
✓
×
×
7
Silvia Clausi
hospital or home
Cerebellar ataxia
70
✓
×
×
8
Isabelle Chiu
hospital
NA
49
✓
×
×
9
Prima Dewi 
Purnamasari
hospital
NA
72
✓
×
×
10
Gillian M. Sandstrom
home
Outpatients who need to quit smoking
×
✓
✓
✓
11
Claudio Gentili
hospital or home
BD
8
✓
×
×
12
Vazquez Montes
home
BD
146
✓
✓
✓
13
Faccio Flavia
home
Cancer
120
✓
✓
✓
14
Ding Xinfang
hospital
MDD
348
✓
×
×
15
Emma Incecik
home
Depression
21
×
✓
×
16
Kowallik Andrea E
hospital
Autism
55
×
✓
✓
17
Bai Ran
home
MDD
334
✓
×
×
18
Dubad Muna
home
Mental health problem
47
×
✓
✓
19
Chin, Kuan-Chen
hospital
Out of hospital cardiac arrest
337
✓
×
×
20
Geerling B
home
BD
17
×
✓
✓
21
Onyema, Edeh 
Michael
hospital
FER2013 data set
×
✓
×
×
22
Masulli Paolo
hospital
Psychosis
111
✓
×
×
23
Parra-Dominguez
hospital
MEEI data set
120
✓
×
×
24
Gangeri Laura
hospital
Cancer
341
✓
×
×
25
Toshiya Akiyama
hospital
Schizophrenia
71
✓
×
×
26
McIntyre, Roger S.
hospital
Health care personnel
100
✓
×
×
27
Huang, Haiyun
hospital
Mental illness disturbance of Consciousness
18
✓
×
×
28
Andrés Cárcamo
hospital
Depression
6
×
✓
×
29
J. Ye
hospital
Depression
164
✓
×
×
30
Ning JIA
hospital
Depression
×
✓
×
×
31
Mano, Leandro Y
home
Extended Cohn-Kanade data set
×
✓
×
×
32
Rejaibi, Emna
hospital
DAIC-WOZ corpus
RAVDESS data set
AVi-D data set
×
✓
×
×
33
Verma, Aakash
hospital or home
Behavior disorder
×
✓
×
×
34
Ye, Jiayu
hospital or home
Depression
164
✓
×
×
35
Munsif, Muhammad
hospital
KEDF public data set
70
✓
✓
×
36
Veerbeek M
home
Mental problems (depression disorder, adjustment 
disorder, anxiety disorder)
836
×
✓
×
37
Barros, Jorge
home
Anxiety disorders
650
×
×
✓
38
Melbye, Sigurd Arne
hospital
BD
206
×
✓
×
39
Tong, Yuying
hospital
Depression
50
✓
×
×
40
Rocamora, Rodrigo
hospital
Epilepsy
493
✓
×
×
41
Li, Yulong
hospital
Androgen alopecia
54
✓
×
×
42
Kuttenreich, 
Anna-Maria
hospital
Facial paralysis
60
✓
×
×
43
Fan, Yiming
hospital
RAF-DB data set
FER + data set
Private data set of stroke patients
84
✓
×
×
44
Cruz, Breno Fiuza
hospital or home
Schizophrenia
193
✓
×
×
Page 12 of 15
Guo et al. BMC Psychology           (2024) 12:95 
indicated that patients with depression exhibit hemi­
spheric asymmetry in brain signals, and their EEGs show 
regular variations [53]. Continuous emotional monitor­
ing can provide insights into the patterns of emotional 
fluctuations in patients, and comprehensive psychologi­
cal interventions may be beneficial for the recovery of 
patients with depression. Emotional recognition systems 
based on cloud computing and the IoT can, to some 
extent, address the following four major healthcare issues 
for patients with emotional disturbances: the short­
age of healthcare professionals, long outpatient waiting 
times, the inability to detect changes in patient emotions 
early, and the increase in additional treatment costs. 
Consequently, these systems can support higher-quality 
healthcare services, thereby enhancing patient care and 
treatment experiences.
Evaluation of emotion recognition technology
Positive and negative effects of emotion recognition 
technology
The use of emotion recognition technology in health­
care offers numerous advantages. First, this technology 
provides a quick and convenient method for conducting 
emotional tests through smart devices, eliminating the 
delays associated with traditional paper questionnaires 
and increasing user compliance. Second, it enables con­
tinuous monitoring of emotional states, aiding in disease 
understanding and the identification of factors affecting 
emotions and early warnings of disease progression or 
relapse, thereby enhancing patient treatment and qual­
ity of life. Additionally, patients can provide timely feed­
back without treatment interruption, helping healthcare 
professionals gain a timelier understanding of their con­
ditions and offer necessary support. Furthermore, this 
technology automates data storage and processing, mak­
ing it easier for healthcare professionals to access and 
analyze patient emotion information, thereby enhancing 
treatment personalization. Finally, incorporating multi­
media elements into emotion tests improves user engage­
ment, ultimately enhancing the user experience and 
increasing participation and compliance rates.
However, there are notable concerns associated with 
the use of emotion recognition technology in health­
care. First, long-term emotional monitoring can put 
pressure on patients, especially when they are required 
to complete daily emotional questionnaires at specific 
times, potentially affecting their participation and will­
ingness to cooperate. Second, privacy concerns loom 
large as patients worry that the technology could com­
promise their personal privacy, particularly when it 
relates to emotional and mental health issues, leading 
some patients to adopt a cautious approach and with­
hold information regarding their true emotional states. 
Additionally, an excessive range of features and options 
in emotion recognition applications may overwhelm 
patients, diverting their attention and hindering their 
ability to focus on the primary goal of emotional moni­
toring, thereby diminishing the effectiveness of these 
applications. These concerns necessitate careful consid­
eration of patient well-being and privacy in the imple­
mentation of this technology.
Limitations of emotion recognition technology
The implementation of emotion recognition technol­
ogy in healthcare involves several challenges. First, data 
access is a critical issue, as the early stages of technology 
development demand a substantial amount of data for 
training predictive and decision models. While public 
databases are widely used by researchers, common prob­
lems with research datasets, such as data imbalance and 
limited dataset size, can lead to disparities between the 
data used for training and experimentation. Second, cost 
is a significant consideration. While medical technology 
aims to reduce costs, the mining, storage, and analysis 
of data, along with human resource and hardware utili­
zation, can be financially burdensome. Third, cultural 
differences pose challenges. Older individuals may lack 
access to or be unwilling to use smart devices, and par­
ticipants’ engagement with online monitoring systems 
may vary in terms of time and extent. Additionally, dif­
ferences in education levels may impact the quality of 
the data generated and necessitate validation efforts. 
Finally, there is a notable lack of consensus on security, 
ethics, and privacy concerns in this context, further com­
plicating the implementation of emotion recognition 
technology in healthcare. Addressing these challenges 
is essential for harnessing the full potential of this tech­
nology while ensuring patient privacy, data quality, and 
cost-effectiveness.
Future development direction
In healthcare systems and health services, automatic 
emotion recognition technology is already being used 
to monitor the conditions of patients with mental health 
disorders. However, the future development of this tech­
nology will not only focus on psychological conditions 
such as depression and anxiety but also expand to moni­
tor the severity of diseases and conditions such as cogni­
tive impairment.
To advance emotion recognition technology, we need 
to overcome the limitations of currently available meth­
ods, which primarily involve the combination of ques­
tionnaires, speech analysis, facial expressions, and 
physiological signals. Instead, we should consider inte­
grating a broader range of modalities to achieve more 
precise emotion recognition. This innovation might 
include incorporating data from other sensory inputs, 
such as touch and taste, as well as textual and image data 
Page 13 of 15
Guo et al. BMC Psychology           (2024) 12:95 
from social media. Furthermore, as artificial intelligence 
and machine learning continue to advance, emotion rec­
ognition technology should move toward automation 
and real-time capabilities. This shift will aid in providing 
more personalized and immediate healthcare services, 
assisting patients in better managing their emotional 
well-being. Finally, issues related to security, ethics, and 
privacy remain areas that require further research and 
attention. It is essential to ensure that the development 
of emotion recognition technology complies with ethical 
and legal requirements while safeguarding patient pri­
vacy and data security.
Limitations
The limitations of this study mainly lie in the review 
process and the assessment criteria. During the review 
process, our study scope may have been constrained by 
the limitations of the search strategy used during the lit­
erature retrieval. Although we made efforts to cover as 
wide a range of literature as possible, there may still be 
cases where some relevant studies were overlooked. We 
were limited to four databases and manually searched 
English-language literature published in the past decade 
to observe and evaluate the latest international research 
results on this topic. However, we cannot determine 
whether research conducted before this time frame or in 
other languages or databases might contain more recent 
research findings. During the evaluation process, it was 
noted that some of the selected studies lacked sufficient 
detail or robustness in terms of system performance. We 
acknowledge that such studies may lack of representa­
tive significance. From the perspective of reviewers, the 
attractiveness of research methods and the novelty of 
performance sometimes take precedence. Although the 
extensive heterogeneity of the results prevented us from 
conducting a meta-analysis, we were able to synthesize 
data from many studies using a comprehensive approach 
with robust analytical processes, encompassing a range of 
different study designs. Furthermore, the included stud­
ies were assessed by the reviewers as moderate to high 
quality, which strengthens the conclusions that can be 
drawn from the synthesized results. In summary, we took 
measures to ensure that our search strategy was as robust 
as possible.
Conclusion
This study elaborated on the potential role of emotions 
in disease diagnosis and treatment. Emotional recogni­
tion technology based on intelligent devices and models 
can support the design and implementation of emotion 
recognition and intervention measures. By collect­
ing patients’ physiological signals through intelligent 
devices and conducting real-time analysis with emo­
tion recognition models, healthcare professionals can 
better understand patients’ psychological states, guiding 
the formulation of diagnosis and treatment plans. Real-
time monitoring of patient emotions can also serve as 
an indicator for assessing treatment efficacy, providing 
a reference for optimizing and adjusting treatment plans 
and thereby improving patient satisfaction and recov­
ery rates. Most studies were conducted when patients 
were in a static state and had sufficient time for testing. 
In dynamic or complex environments, continuous emo­
tion recognition technology for addressing emotional 
changes still requires further research and improvement. 
This includes but is not limited to the following aspects. 
First, it is necessary to improve the robustness of emo­
tion recognition models so that they can effectively rec­
ognize emotions in complex environments, such as noise 
interference and motion interference. Second, it is neces­
sary to further explore and develop emotion recognition 
methods based on multimodal data that combine mul­
tiple information sources, such as physiological signals, 
speech, and body movements, to improve the accuracy 
and reliability of emotion recognition. This is an impor­
tant area for future development.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.
org/10.1186/s40359-024-01581-4.
Supplementary Material 1
Supplementary Material 2
Supplementary Material 3
Acknowledgements
Not applicable.
Author contributions
Runfang Guo and Bin Li planned the paper, structured the article and 
contributed to the core research ideas. Bin Li provided valuable feedback 
and helped in article preparation. Hongfei Guo, Liwen Wang, Mengmeng 
Chen and Dong Yang discussed the research problems and put forward 
suggestions. All authors have reviewed the manuscript and agreed to the 
published version of the manuscript.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: This work was 
supported by Anhui Provincial University Natural Science Key Project (No. 
2022AH051458). The University Synergy Innovation Program of Anhui Province 
(No. GXXT-2022-058) provided us with language polishing.
Data availability
No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Page 14 of 15
Guo et al. BMC Psychology           (2024) 12:95 
Competing interests
The authors state that they have no conflicts of interest.
Author details
1The First Affiliated Hospital of Bengbu Medical University, Bengbu 
Medical University, 287 Changhuai Road, Bengbu, China
2School of Public Health, Bengbu Medical University, Bengbu, China
3School of Health Management, Bengbu Medical University, Bengbu, 
China
4School of Humanities, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
Received: 5 December 2023 / Accepted: 11 February 2024
References
1.	
James W. What is an emotion. Mind, 1884,9(34):188–205.
2.	
Lange CG. The Emotions: a psycho physiological study. Emotions, 
1885,33–90.
3.	
Maithri M, Raghavendra U, Gudigar A, et al. Automated emotion recognition: 
current trends and future perspectives. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 
2022;215:106646.
4.	
Goodwin F, Jamison KR. Manic-depressive illness: bipolar disorders and recur­
rent depression. Ecol. 2012.
5.	
Kupka RW, Knoppert-van der Klein E, Nolen WA. Handboek bipolaire stoornis­
sen. Uitgeverij De Tijdstroom; 2008.
6.	
Bonsall MB, Wallace-Hadrill SM, Geddes JR, et al. Nonlinear time-series 
approaches in characterizing mood stability and mood instability in bipolar 
disorder. Proc Biol Sci. 2012;279(1730):916–24.
7.	
Judd LL, Schettler PJ, Akiskal HS, et al. Long-term symptomatic status of 
bipolar I vs. bipolar II disorders. Neuropsychopharmacol. 2003;6(2):127–37.
8.	
Strejilevich SA, Martino DJ, Murru A, et al. Mood instability and functional 
recovery in bipolar disorders. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 2013;128(3):194–202.
9.	
Leverich GS, Nolen WA, Rush AJ, et al. The stanley foundation bipolar 
treatment outcome network. I. Longitudinal methodology. Affect Disord. 
2001;67(1–3):33–44.
10.	 Schmitz N, Hartkamp N, Franke GH. Assessing clinically significant change: 
application to the SCL-90-R. Psychol Rep. 2000;86(1):263–74.
11.	 McNair DM, Lorr M, Droppleman LF. Profile of mood states manual. San 
Diego: Educational and industrial testing service; 1971.
12.	 Metzler H, Rimé B, Pellert M, Niederkrotenthaler T, Di Natale A, Garcia 
D. Collective emotions during the COVID-19 outbreak. Emot Aprile. 
2023;23(3):844–58.
13.	 Boccaccio FM, Gubitosa S, Pirrone C. Exploring the interplay between Facial 
Expression Recognition and Emotional Intelligence in adults: implications for 
Novel Learning methods. Educ Sci. 2023;13(11):1112.
14.	 Hale T, Angrist N, Goldszmidt R, et al. A global panel database of pandemic 
policies (Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker). Nat Hum Behav. 
2021;5:529–38.
15.	 Pellert M, Schweighofer S, Garcia D. The individual dynamics of affective 
expression on social media. EPJ Data Sci. 2020;9:1.
16.	 Oliver N, et al. Mobile phone data for informing public health actions across 
the COVID-19 pandemic life cycle. Sci Adv. 2020;6:eabc0764.
17.	 Amico F, Healy G, Arvaneh M, et al. Multimodal validation of facial expression 
detection software for real-time monitoring of affect in patients with suicidal 
intent. Eur Psychiatry. 2016;33(S1):596–S596.
18.	 Sandstrom GM, Lathia N, Mascolo C, et al. Opportunities for smartphones 
in clinical care: the future of mobile mood monitoring. Clin Psychiatry. 
2016;77(2):135–7.
19.	 Page MJ, Moher D, Bossuyt PM, et al. PRISMA 2020 explanation and elabora­
tion: updated guidance and exemplars for reporting systematic reviews. BMJ. 
2021;372:n160.
20.	 BMJ (OPEN ACCESS), Page MJ, McKenzie JE, Bossuyt PM, Boutron I, Hoffmann 
TC, Mulrow CD et al. The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for 
reporting systematic reviews. BMJ 2021;372:n71.
21.	 Critical appraisal skills programme. (2022). CASP (Systematic Review) Check­
list. https://casp-uk.net/referencing/.
22.	 Higgins J, Green S. Cochrane handbook for systematic reviews of interven­
tions version. The cochrane collaboration; 2011.
23.	 Roger S, McIntyre L, Bloudek JY, Timmons. Patrick Gillard & Amanda Har­
rington. Total healthcare cost savings through improved bipolar I disorder 
identification using the Rapid Mood Screener in patients diagnosed with 
major depressive disorder. Curr Med Res Opin. 2023;39(4):605–11.
24.	 Rocamora R, Chavarría B, Pérez E, Pérez-Enríquez C, Barguilla A, Panadés-de 
Oliveira L et al. Mood disturbances, anxiety, and impact on quality of life 
in patients admitted to Epilepsy Monitoring units. Frontiers in Neurology, 
2021,12.
25.	 Masulli P, Galazka M, Eberhard D, et al. Data-driven analysis of gaze patterns 
in face perception: methodological and clinical contributions. Cortex. 
2022;147:9–23.
26.	 Oort Q, Zwinkels H, Koekkoek JAF, et al. Is the EORTC QLQ-C30 emotional 
functioning scale appropriate as an initial screening measure to identify brain 
tumour patients who may possibly have a mood disorder? Psychooncology. 
2022;31(6):995–1002.
27.	 Faccio F et al. Development of an eHealth tool for cancer patients: monitor­
ing psycho-emotional aspects with the Family Resilience (FaRe) Question­
naire. ecancermedicalscience 12 (2018).
28.	 Veerbeek M, Oude Voshaar R, Depla M, et al. Mental health care monitor 
older adults (MEMO): monitoring patient characteristics and outcome 
in Dutch mental health services for older adults. Methods Psychiatr Res. 
2013;22(2):100–9.
29.	 Kobak KA, Greist JH, Jefferson JW, et al. New technologies to improve clinical 
trials. Clin Psychopharmacol. 2001;21(3):255–6.
30.	 Stone AA, Shiffman S, Schwartz JE, et al. Patient compliance with paper and 
electronic diaries. Control Clin Trials. 2003;24(2):182–99.
31.	 Conner TS, Barrett LF. Trends in ambulatory self-report: the role of momentary 
experience in psychosomatic medicine. Psychosom Med. 2012;74(4):327–37.
32.	 Tsanas A, Saunders KE, Bilderbeck AC, et al. Daily longitudinal self-monitoring 
of mood variability in bipolar disorder and borderline personality disorder. 
Affect Disord. 2016;205:225–33.
33.	 Koolagudi SG, Rao KS. Emotion recognition from speech: a review. Speech 
Technol. 2012;15(2):99–117.
34.	 Pao TL, Chen YT, Yeh JH. Emotion recognition from Mandarin speech signals. 
2004 International symposium on Chinese spoken language processing. IEEE, 
2004, p.301–4. (IEEE Cat. No.04EX877).
35.	 Zhu L, Chen L, Zhao D, et al. Emotion recognition from Chinese speech for 
smart affective services using a combination of SVM and DBN. Sens (Basel). 
2017;17(7):1694.
36.	 Likitha MS, Gupta SRR, Hasitha K, Raju AU. Speech based human emotion 
recognition using MFCC. Institute of electrical and electronics engineers. 
2018, p. 2257–60.
37.	 Wang Y, Hu W. Speech emotion recognition based on improved MFCC. In 
Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on computer science and 
application engineering. 2018 Oct 22 (pp. 1–7).
38.	 Chin KC, Hsieh TC, Chiang WC, et al. Early recognition of a caller’s emotion in 
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest dispatching: an artificial intelligence approach. 
Resuscitation. 2021;167:144–50.
39.	 Emna Rejaibi A, Komaty F, Meriaudeau, et al. MFCC-based recurrent neural 
network for automatic clinical depression recognition and assessment from 
speech. Biomed Signal Process Control. 2022;71:103–7.
40.	 Yang B, Cao J, Ni, Zhang R. Facial expression recognition using weighted 
mixture deep neural network based on double-channel facial images. IEEE, 
2017.
41.	 Ekman Paul and Wallace V. Friesen. Facial action coding system. Environmen­
tal psychology & Nonverbal behavior; 1978.
42.	 Goodfellow IJ, Erhan D, Luc Carrier P, et al. Challenges in representa­
tion learning: a report on three machine learning contests. Neural Netw. 
2015;64:59–63.
43.	 Li S, Deng W, JunPing, Du. Reliable crowdsourcing and deep locality-preserv­
ing learning for expression recognition in the wild. Proceedings of the IEEE 
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2017,pp:21–26.
44.	 Li H et al. A convolutional neural network cascade for face detection. Pro­
ceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 
2015,pp:5325– 5334.
45.	 Zhang J, et al. Watch attend and parse: an end-to-end neural network based 
approach to handwritten mathematical expression recognition. Pattern 
Recognit. 2017;71:196–206.
46.	 Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, et al. Attention is all you need. Adv Neural 
Inform Process Syst 30. 2017. arXiv:1706.03762.
47.	 Aouayeb M, Hamidouche W, Soladie C et al. Learning Vision Transformer 
with Squeeze and Excitation for Facial Expression Recognition. arXiv. 2021, 
arXiv:2107.03107.
Page 15 of 15
Guo et al. BMC Psychology           (2024) 12:95 
48.	 Dosovitskiy A, Beyer L, Kolesnikov A et al. An image is worth 16x16 words: 
transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv. 2020, arXiv:2010.11929.
49.	 Ye J, Fu G, Liu Y et al. Dep-ViT: uncertainty suppression model based on facial 
expression recognition in depression ptients. Artif Neural Networks Mach 
Learn. 2022, pp:113–24.
50.	 Verma A, Dogra A, Malik K, Talwar M. Emotion recognition system for patients 
with behavioral disorders. Adv Intell Syst Comput. 2018;624:139–45.
51.	 Gentili C, Valenza G, Nardelli M, et al. Longitudinal monitoring of heartbeat 
dynamics predicts mood changes in bipolar patients: a pilot study. Affect 
Disord. 2017;209:30–8.
52.	 Hossain MS. Patient state recognition system for healthcare using speech and 
facial expressions. Med Syst. 2016;40(12):272.
53.	 Tong Y, Zhao G, Zhao J, et al. Biases of happy faces in face classification pro­
cessing of depression in Chinese patients. Neural Plast. 2020;2020:7235734.
54.	 Bai R, Xiao L, Guo Y, et al. Tracking and monitoring mood stability of patients 
with major depressive disorder by machine learning models using pas­
sive digital data: prospective naturalistic multicenter study. JMIR mHealth 
uHealth. 2021;9(6):e30540.
55.	 Dubad M, Elahi F, Marwaha S. The clinical impacts of mobile mood-monitor­
ing in young people with mental health problems: the MeMO study. Front 
Psychiatry. 2021;12:687270.
56.	 Gangeri L, Alfieri S, Greco M, et al. Construction process and development 
stages of pandemic emotions questionnaire in cancer patients (PEQ-CP). 
BMC Psychol. 2022;10(1):226.
57.	 Li Y, Wu B, Li X, et al. Research on mental stress recognition of depressive 
disorders in patients with androgenic alopecia based on machine learning 
and fuzzy K-Means clustering. Front Genet. 2021;12:751791.
58.	 Li Y, Dai W, Ming Z, Qiu M. Privacy protection for preventing data over collec­
tion in smart city. Comput. 2016;65(5):1339–50.
59.	 Parra-Dominguez GS, Sanchez-Yanez RE, Garcia-Capulin CH. Towards facial 
gesture recognition in photographs of patients with facial palsy. Healthc 
(Basel). 2022;10(4):659.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
