# 2025利用雷达技术进行心脏健康

> Source: 2025利用雷达技术进行心脏健康(心率).pdf

## Page 1

Smart furniture using radar 
technology for cardiac health 
monitoring
Ali Gharamohammadi1, Mohammad Omid Bagheri2, Serene Abu-Sardanah2, 
Michael M. Y. R. Riad2, Hajar Abedi2, Ahmad Ansariyan2, Kang Wang3, Ashish Saragadam3, 
Dmytro Chumachenko4, Shahabeddin Abhari3, Plinio Pelegrini Morita3, Amir Khajepour1 & 
George Shaker2
The integration of radar technology into smart furniture represents a practical approach to health 
monitoring, circumventing the concerns regarding user convenience and privacy often encountered 
by conventional smart home systems. Radar technology’s inherent non-contact methodology, 
privacy-preserving features, adaptability to diverse environmental conditions, and high precision 
characteristics collectively establish it a compelling alternative for comprehensive health monitoring 
within domestic environments. In this paper, we introduce a millimeter (mm)-wave radar system 
positioned strategically behind a seat, featuring an algorithm capable of identifying unique cardiac 
waveform patterns for healthy subjects. These patterns are characterized by two peaks followed by 
a valley in each cycle, which can be correlated to Electrocardiogram (ECG), enabling effective cardiac 
waveform monitoring. The provided algorithm excels in discerning variations in heart patterns, 
particularly in individuals with prolonged corrected QT intervals, by minimizing high frequency 
breathing interference and ensuring accurate pattern recognition. Additionally, this paper addresses 
the influence of body movements in seated individuals, conducting a comprehensive study on heart 
rate variability and estimation. Experiment results demonstrate a maximum interbeat intervals (IBI) 
error of 30 milliseconds and an average relative error of 4.8% in heart rate estimation, showcasing the 
efficacy of the proposed method utilizing variational mode decomposition and a multi-bin approach.
Smart home monitoring is recognized as a key application of health sensors and internet of things, offering 
advantages in diagnostics, long-term monitoring, and emergency event detection. Among various applications, 
vital sign monitoring in smart furniture stands out as a critical means of assessing residents’ health status, 
providing essential information such as breathing rate (BR), heart rate (HR), and heart rate variability (HRV)1–11.
The global population has witnessed a growing incidence of fatalities attributed to chronic and cardiovascular 
diseases12,13. Electrocardiography and echocardiography are established standards for monitoring heart activity. 
ECGs track the heart’s electrical activity, while echocardiograms provide insights into the heart’s structure 
and blood vessels14,15. These diagnostic tools are effective for detecting cardiovascular diseases but come at a 
significant cost and require specialized training to operate. Frequency modulated continuous wave (FMCW) 
radar, a highly motion-sensitive sensor, offers a cost-effective and user-friendly alternative for certain conditions. 
Despite operating at millimeter wavelengths with limited skin penetration16, FMCW radar can still detect skin 
displacements caused by heartbeats. By correlating these displacements with the ECG signal, which associates 
heart motions with P, Q, R, S, and T-waves, employing electrical cardiac insights in conjunction with radar 
sensors is possible. However, recent research has predominantly concentrated on HR estimation17–21 rather than 
cardiac waveform monitoring, which can be used to extract HRV. HRV metrics, such as the root mean square 
of successive differences (RMSSD), the standard deviation of the RR interval (SDRR), and the percentage of 
successive IBIs that differ by more than 50 ms (pNN50) can be derived to assess the accuracy of HRV estimation.
One of the most recent insights is to estimate HRV which refers to the fluctuations in the time intervals 
between successive heartbeats, also known as IBIs. Accurate HRV monitoring plays a crucial role in various 
applications, including the early diagnosis of cardiovascular disorders, stress assessment, recognition of 
1Department of Mechanical and Mechatronics Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada. 
2Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada. 3School of 
Public Health Sciences, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada. 4Department of Mathematical Modelling 
and Artificial Intelligence, National Aerospace University, Kharkiv Aviation Institute, Kharkiv, Ukraine. email: 
Aligharamohammadi@gmail.com
OPEN
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1392 
1
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-80062-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports


## Page 2

emotions, and anxiety treatment22–24. Estimating HRV from radar signals provides a valuable opportunity for 
deeper insights.
More recently, some studies have investigated the estimation of cardiac waveform using radar signals 
which can be used for HR and HRV estimation. Some of these studies have utilized neural networks and 
machine learning techniques to derive ECG patterns from radar data14,25–31. However, these methodologies 
are predominantly trained on data from individuals without cardiovascular conditions. Consequently, their 
applicability to individuals with heart diseases may be uncertain. The correlation between cardiac waveform 
from radar and ECG signal reveals that the T-peak in the ECG signal corresponds to a downward peak in the 
estimated displacement by radar; however, these findings were observed during a breath-hold period without 
body movements15.
Other studies employed wearable radars to reconstruct cardiac waveform32–35. The literature presents a 
quadruple radar system designed to monitor each main chamber of the heart using a node32,33. The results indicate 
that the waveforms of those nodes are highly correlated when their signals are not blocked. Consequently, the 
study focusing on estimating the cardiac waveform using a single radar is presented34. Although wearable radar 
systems have an accurate HRV estimation, the proposed setup is unfeasible for real-world scenarios since they 
must be worn all the time. Therefore, it is crucial to use these systems for real-world scenarios.
Prolonged corrected QT intervals (QTc) have been identified as a risk factor contributing to sudden 
cardiac deaths in the general population36. Therefore, monitoring individuals with this heart condition is 
extremely valuable. Recent studies mostly investigated their algorithms in healthy subjects for HR and HRV 
estimation22,27,34,37–42. However, individuals with prolonged QTc may have normal HR and HRV36.
Three major challenges in real-world smart furniture scenarios need to be addressed: high frequency 
harmonics of breathing, body movements, and range bin selection. In many studies reported in the literature, 
participants were asked to hold their breath or breathe shallowly while seated15,32,34,38,40,43. Some signal 
processing approaches are also employed to remove high frequency harmonics of breathing and compensate 
body movements37,41,44. However, range bin selection is still a challenge in these investigations.
This paper presents a solution for addressing challenges associated with smart furniture by leveraging mm-
wave radar technology, with the following contributions: I) Investigations on the cardiac waveform of healthy 
subjects by radar signals reveal that heart displacements on the skin have two peaks sequenced with one valley 
in each cycle. This pattern is verified in different breathing situations, including shallow and deep breathing 
patterns. Additionally, the investigation of this pattern extends to different subjects while HR was high or 
low. Based on the reconstructed cardiac waveform, HR and HRV are estimated; II) In individuals with the 
prolonged QTc condition, the previously mentioned typical cardiac waveform pattern is no longer applicable. 
Consequently, this distinctive cardiac waveform can serve as an effective indicator for detecting heart-related 
issues. We have confirmed this distinction through validation with multiple subjects exhibiting the prolonged 
QTc condition; III) Investigation on the deep and shallow breathing removal from heart displacements using a 
heuristic approach that utilizes the VMD algorithm for harmonic analysis. Our findings indicate that, even in 
the presence of deep breathing, it is feasible to reconstruct the cardiac waveform of healthy individuals which 
has two peaks sequenced with one valley in each cycle using a minimum of two harmonics. It is essential to 
note that if the identified harmonics for cardiac waveform reconstruction correspond for the second, third, or 
fourth harmonics of breathing, they should be excluded from the cardiac waveform reconstruction process; IV) 
Investigations on different body movements of seated people. The results indicated that body movements usually 
cause spikes in estimated movements by radar signal. These movements can introduce interference across a 
wide range of frequency bands, covering both breathing and heartbeat frequencies. Therefore, it is concluded 
that these movements cannot be compensated by frequency domain approaches like filtering. Consequently, 
it is imperative to employ time-domain approaches to effectively address and mitigate the interference caused 
by these movements. In addition, if body movement compensation cannot recover a range bin, the corrupted 
range bin is removed by comparing with other range bins. V) Positioning the proposed radar system behind 
the seat. This sensor placement eliminates the need for any range bin selection in the signal processing chain. 
Additionally, noise effects on the phase become more pronounced at longer distances compared to closer ranges.
Methods
Cardiac anatomy and electrical activity in healthy individuals
The heart is typically divided into four main chambers, the right atrium (RA), right ventricle (RV), left atrium 
(LA), and left ventricle (LV) as shown in Fig. 1a. The atria and ventricles are divided by atrioventricular valves, 
while the left and right ventricles are separated by the ventricular septum. The left ventricle is linked to the aorta 
through the aortic valve, and the right ventricle is connected to the pulmonary artery through the pulmonary 
valve45.
In a healthy individual, the heart’s electrical and mechanical activities follow a specific pattern. It starts with 
an electrical signal, the depolarization wave, originating in the right atrium, leading to atrial contraction (P 
wave on the ECG). This atrial contraction is known as atrial systole. The depolarization of the right and left 
ventricles (marked by the QRS complex on the ECG) triggers their contraction, initiating ventricular systole. 
Repolarization of the ventricular muscle cells occurs in two phases, spanning from the end of the QRS complex 
to the end of the T wave. The cardiac cycle is completed with the T wave. Because the ventricles are larger and 
depolarize more quickly than the atria, their contraction during ventricular systole is more forceful and rapid45. 
The key stages of the cardiac cycle and their alignment with ECG waves are illustrated in Fig. 1b.
Fundamental of FMCW radar for vital sign monitoring
The fundamental principle underlying the FMCW Radar system is founded upon the transmission of an amplified 
electromagnetic signal, originating from a signal generator, into the surrounding environment. Subsequently, 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1392 
2
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-80062-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


## Page 3

the radar system captures reflected signals back from different objects, conveying object properties such as 
distance and velocity. Figure 2 represents the block diagram of a radar module, wherein both the transmitter and 
receiver coexist within the same physical location. Following the amplification of the received signal through 
the utilization of a low-noise amplifier, a mixer correlates the transmitted and received signals, generating both 
low-frequency and high-frequency signals. To effectively eliminate the high-frequency components, the system 
incorporates a low-pass filter. Subsequently, an analog-to-digital converter is employed to convert the analog 
signal into a digital format46.
In FMCW radar, the signal generator performs a sweep from the starting frequency, denoted as fmin, to the 
final frequency, denoted as fmax, with a positive slope represented as K. The generated signal from this sweep 
is called chirp. FMCW radars can accommodate a specific range of chirp slopes. Therefore, it is important to 
design the chirp slope within a range that is achievable and practical. This frequency sweep takes place over 
a specified time duration, denoted as T. The resulting signal generated by the signal generator is commonly 
referred to as a chirp. The resultant frequency bandwidth (BW) for a chirp is determined as (1),
	
BW = fmax −fmin = KT
(1)
The frequency bandwidth also plays a crucial role in determining the range resolution of the radar. The 
relationship between range resolution and frequency bandwidth is expressed as (2),
	
∆R =
c
2 · BW 
(2)
where ∆R and c are range resolution and light velocity in free space respectively. Range resolution discretizes 
the range in FMCW radar47. Improved range resolution results in more precise range estimation and enhanced 
differentiation between closely spaced reflections. In FMCW radar, the range can be estimated by identifying 
the peak frequency of the reflected chirp signal in the frequency domain. The transmitted chirp signal (x(t)) 
in the time domain can be expressed in (3). Suppose that there is a single reflection with a delay of td from the 
environment. Then, the resulting output of the low pass filter (y(t)) is calculated as (4). where α represents the 
influence of both the environment and the target on the amplitude of the transmitted signal and td is calculated 
as td=(2R)/c. This low pass signal is called beat signal. Given the low range of the target, td is significantly less 
than t. Consequently, the beat signal can be simplified as (5). As the last step, the range of the target can be 
determined by applying a fast Fourier transform (FFT) to the low pass signal.
Fig. 2.  The block diagram of radar system before digital signal processing.
 
Fig. 1.  Cardiac physiology and function: (a) Anatomy of the heart44 and (b) ECG waves and their relation to 
the cardiac cycle.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1392 
3
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-80062-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


## Page 4

	
x(t) = A cos(2π.fmin.t + π.K.t2),
0 < t < T
(3)
	
y(t) = A2.α. cos (
2π.fmin.td + 2π.k (
t.td −t2
d
))

(4)
	
y(t) ≈A2.α. cos(2π.fmin.td + 2π.k.t.td)
(5)
Signal and system design for vital sign monitoring
There are several factors that can be considered for sensor selection. Firstly, radar with higher carrier frequencies 
has low levels of noise. Secondly, higher carrier frequency has higher sensitivity to small movements. Therefore, 
radar with higher carrier frequencies can monitor small movements more accurately48. There is an extensive study 
on different radars with different center frequencies, including 7.7, 24, and 77 GHz41. The results indicate that 
radar with higher frequency has less estimation error than other radars. However, the federal communications 
commission (FCC) is currently prioritizing the use of the 60 GHz band for health applications and indoor use 
cases49. As a result, an off-the-shelf 60 GHz radar is used in this study.
In signal design, several parameters directly influence the system’s functionality like pulse repetition 
frequency, range resolution, number of samples per chirp, number of chirps in a frame, sampling rate, chirp 
slope, and idle time. Table 1 summarizes the designed signal’s parameters. The radar can produce a couple of 
frames per second which is known as the pulse repetition frequency. The pulse repetition frequency can be 
designed based on the maximum frequency of vibrations. 6 Hz is an acceptable boundary for cardiac waveform 
monitoring34. However, in this paper, 10 Hz is considered the maximum frequency of vibration. Hence, the pulse 
repetition frequency is 20 based on Nyquist theorem.
Another effective parameter which can improve results is range resolution48. In this paper, the BGT60TR13C 
FMCW radar from Infineon Technologies is used. This sensor can produce an FMCW signal from 58 GHz to 
63.5 GHz modulated by the sawtooth wave. The achievable range resolution based on the provided documents 
from Infineon is almost 3 cm50. As a result, the effective bandwidth is 5 GHz. The number of samples can 
determine the maximum achievable range by considering the range resolution of the system.
The number of chirps is another factor that has a direct effect on signal quality. Since breathing and heart 
displacements are slow activities, the reflected chirps in a pulse are very similar to each other. However, by taking 
an average from all the chirps in a pulse, the phase noise of the signal can be improved. In this paper, we have 
considered 32 chirps per pulse. Other parameters are chosen accordingly51.
Undesired harmonics and body movement effects
The first step to accurately monitor cardiac waveform is to understand other movements, including breathing 
and body movements. Firstly, it is necessary to estimate BR since breathing harmonics have a comparable 
amplitude to the cardiac waveform. If the cardiac HR peak, typically in the range of 0.8-6 Hz, is determined 
to be an integer multiple of the BR frequency, the HR value and resulting waveform, cannot be trusted. In 
addition, the intermodulation harmonics can be generated because of the non-linear relation between breathing 
and heart displacements. These harmonics are not stronger than the cardiac waveform since the effect of each 
displacement is based on the Bessel function of the first kind which is less than one52.
Secondly, body movements have a direct effect on the measurement of breathing and cardiac waveform. Since 
these movements usually have greater displacements than breathing and heart displacements, they can corrupt 
human vibration signals in the frequency domain. Figure 3 shows the torso movements’ effect on the unfiltered 
vibration signal when the radar is behind a seat. As can be seen in Fig. 3a, the body movement effect is similar to 
a narrow strong pulse. Therefore, its frequency response is similar to a sinc function with strong low frequency 
components, which can make BR and HR estimations difficult. In addition, since it has a strong amplitude, it can 
generate strong high frequency components that might affect estimated cardiac waveform as well. Figure 3b,c 
show positive and negative DC offsets respectively. These DC offsets can affect all the frequencies and can make 
BR, HR, breathing waveform, and cardiac waveform.
Figure 4 depicts the STFT of different activities in which the signal is filtered by a high pass filter with a 
cutoff frequency of 0.1 Hz. In all the measurements except sitting, the participant was breathing. Normal and 
deep breathing do not exhibit significant high-amplitude components, as demonstrated in Fig. 4a,b, respectively. 
However, other activities in which torso moves forward or backward, as shown in Fig. 4c–h, have high-amplitude 
Parameter
Value
Pulse repetition frequency
20 Hz
Bandwidth
5 GHz
Range resolution
3 cm
Maximum range
96 cm
Number of samples
64
Sampling rate
1 MHz
Chirp slope
78.128 MHz/µs
Idle time
5 µs
Number of chirps
32
Table 1.  Designed signal parameters.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1392 
4
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-80062-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


## Page 5

displacement and can make strong frequency components, especially in lower frequencies. Therefore, body 
movements can distort breathing and heart displacements. As a result, since these body movements cannot be 
mitigated by filtering and can affect BR and HR estimations, they should be compensated in the time domain. By 
taking a derivative from the unfiltered signal and setting a threshold for the spikes, those spikes can be detected 
and compensated. The threshold can be determined by studying different participants with different breathing 
rates and depths.
Signal processing chain to reconstruct cardiac waveform
Figure 5 depicts the signal processing chain to reconstruct cardiac waveform from human body vibrations. In 
this paper, after DC removal and fast-time FFT, multiple range bins are employed to reconstruct the cardiac 
waveform. Since the torso width is more than 40 cm for adults53, and radar is placed in the middle of the back, 
6 range bins (from range bin number 4 to 9) are chosen, considering a 3 cm range resolution51. Then, phase of 
each bin is extracted to reconstruct body vibrations. Due to the high amplitude of human body vibrations in 
comparison to wavelength, which is almost 5 mm, it is necessary to unwrap the phase.
Multiple steps were employed to mitigate the high amplitude body movements in the time domain as provided 
in Algorithm 1. Firstly, the derivative of the signal is taken to find spikes in the vibration signal. In the next step, 
a threshold is used to determine the spikes in the signal. The threshold level determination needs to be done 
statistically by collecting data from different participants. These participants were asked to breathe shallowly and 
deeply while seated. Approximately 300 measurements were collected from a group of 4 participants to estimate 
statistical parameters. The threshold level based on the empirical rule54, is determined as 0.48 mm/sample. If 
the amplitude of the differentiated movement is more than this threshold, the derivative of the signal is set to 
Fig. 3.  Torso movements’ impact on the unfiltered vibration signal: (a) narrow strong pulse (b) positive DC 
offset (c) negative DC offset.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1392 
5
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-80062-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


## Page 6

zero. Finally, the cumulative sum in Algorithm 1 reconstructs the body vibration signal with compensated body 
movements.
Fig. 4.  The STFT of different activities in which the vibration signal is filtered by a high pass filter with a cut-
off frequency of 0.1 Hz: (a) normal breathing (b) deep breathing (c) standing (d) sitting (e) torso movements 
(f) random body movements (g) hitting the chair (h) swinging the chair.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1392 
6
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-80062-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


## Page 7

Algorithm 1.  Body movement compensation
Algorithm 2.  Reconstruction of cardiac waveform from VMD IMFs and estimated BR
After body movement compensation, the body vibration signal can be used for BR, HR, and HRV estimations. 
Since the breathing waveform is the second interfere after body movement compensation for cardiac waveform 
reconstruction, it should be excluded from cardiac waveform reconstruction. Due to the periodic nature of 
breathing, BR estimation can determine breathing harmonics. Therefore, the body vibration signal without body 
movements is filtered by a band pass filter from 0.1 Hz to 0.8 Hz. In addition to this human body movement 
compensation, an outlier removal is applied to remove distorted range bins. In this paper, the one-sigma 
approach in outlier removal considers data points within one standard deviation from the mean as normal and 
excludes those outside this range as outliers.
To estimate HR and HRV, the main harmonic of the breathing waveform can be filtered by a band pass filter 
from 0.8 Hz to 6 Hz. A narrower bandpass filter removes cardiac waveform details. However, higher frequency 
harmonics of breathing waveform still can interfere with cardiac waveform, especially during deep breathing. 
VMD approach can be employed to decompose different harmonics after band pass filtering. In this paper, the 
filtered signal is decomposed into 10 intrinsic mode functions (IMF). The strongest IMF, which is not an integer 
multiple of BR, is the main harmonic of the cardiac waveform. As we discussed earlier, nonlinear harmonics 
generated from breathing and heart displacements cannot be stronger than the main harmonic of heart. If 
the higher harmonics of the cardiac waveform are not an integer multiple of BR, they can be used for cardiac 
waveform reconstruction. The cardiac waveform should be reconstructed by at least two harmonics. Otherwise, 
Fig. 5.  The signal processing chain to reconstruct cardiac waveform from human body vibrations.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1392 
7
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-80062-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


## Page 8

the cardiac waveform cannot be reconstructed. Finally, HRV can be estimated based on the reconstructed 
waveform. Algorithm 2 provides the cardiac waveform reconstruction.
Experimental setup and protocol for radar-based health monitoring
In this study, we employed the BGT60TR13C radar module developed by Infineon. This radar module operates 
at 60 GHz and can provide an almost 5 GHz bandwidth. The overall dimensions of this radar package measure 
64 mm × 25.4 mm55. Due to its compact size, this radar module can be integrated into smart furniture without 
causing any inconvenience to occupants.
The placement of the sensor significantly affects the radar’s ability to measure displacement accurately. 
There are two key factors to consider in sensor placement. First, the angle and distance between the radar and 
the human body play a crucial role. Placing the radar in front of the displacement enables precise estimation 
because the radar measures radial displacements, and high-amplitude displacements are less susceptible to 
noise interference. Moreover, the radar equation shows that reflected power increases significantly with shorter 
distances to the fourth power, making radar measurements less susceptible to noise at close ranges. Therefore, 
for the most precise displacement estimates, it is advisable to position the radar in front of the displacement at 
the closest possible range.
Secondly, for individuals in a seated position, the radar can be placed either on the desk in front of the chest 
or behind the seat. The desk-mounted radar can effectively measure chest and abdomen wall displacements, 
which are more pronounced than back wall displacement. However, it may be more susceptible to interference 
from other human body movements, such as hand and head movements. In contrast, the seat-mounted radar 
operates at a closer range, resulting in a stronger signal-to-noise ratio. Furthermore, it offers a more stable setup 
than the desk-mounted radar, which can be easily altered due to its position on the desk. In addition, the results 
obtained from the seat radar can be compared with those from a setup where the radar is attached to the shirt 
using adhesive tape. Finally, the effect of different radars in a smart home is also explored in terms of interference 
while those radars are synchronized or non-synchronized. Finally, the impact of different radars in a smart 
home is also examined concerning interference, considering whether those radars are synchronized or non-
synchronized. Figure 6 illustrates the experimental setup for data collection. Participants were asked to sit on a 
chair and were given the option to either work with their laptops or take a rest. Figure 6a depicts the seat radar 
for data collection, installed behind the seat. Figure 6b depicts the experimental setup for interference effect 
from wall radar with and without synchronization. To evaluate seat radar results, two different belts, including 
Frontier X for ECG data collection56, as can be seen in Fig. 6c and BioRadio piezo electric respiratory effort belt 
for respiratory data collection57, as can be seen in Fig. 6d, are employed.
In the first data campaign, the accuracy of HRV and HR estimation are evaluated. Eight healthy subjects 
(four females and four males; age: 30 ± 11 years; weight: 70 ± 20 kg; height: 164 ± 14 cm) participated in these 
experiments. The duration of the main measurement was around 20 mins. Additionally, we also investigated 
body movements detection in human body vibrations in a separate measurement.
In the second data campaign, the evaluation focused on studying the cardiac waveform in older adult 
subjects with and without cardiac conditions. The subject group consisted of 15 subjects with an average 
Fig. 6.  The experimental setup: (a) the experimental setup with the seat radar installed behind the seat. (b) the 
interference test setup in the presence of wall radar. (c) Frontier X for ECG data collection. (d) BioRadio piezo 
electric respiratory effort belt for respiratory data collection.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1392 
8
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-80062-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


## Page 9

age of 75 years (±5 years), average weight of 65 kg (±10 kg), and average height of 167 cm (±9 cm). These 
individuals actively engaged in the experiments while in a seated position, and the measurement duration was 
approximately 12 minutes. Notably, among these participants, five were identified with heart issues based on 
ECG data. Specifically, one participant exhibited Tachycardia, while the remaining four had a prolonged QTc. 
The University of Waterloo’s Clinical Research Ethics Committee approved the study for data collection (ORE #: 
43843). All participants provided informed consent for their data to be collected, analyzed, and for the results of 
the study to be published. All methods were carried out in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations. 
The raw individual data files during the current study are not publicly available because explicit consent for 
sharing individual data was not obtained from the participants. However, while we cannot share specific data 
from individual participants, we can provide detailed descriptions of the data collected and summarize the 
findings and insights gained from each participant’s data.
Results
Cardiac waveform verification
In this paper, our investigations of radar signals measuring cardiac waveform indicate a periodic pattern on the 
skin. Figure 7 represents cardiac waveform filtered from 0.8 Hz to 3 Hz in a breath-hold period, synchronized 
with ECG data. In this measurement, the radar is placed in the middle of the back of the seat and its z-height 
is equal to heart height. It is concluded that T-waves correspond for valleys in radar displacements after 
Fig. 8.  The cardiac waveform filtered from 0.8 to 6 Hz while radar has the same height as heart during a 
breath-hold in two distinct setups: (a) radar is located behind the seat and (b) radar is located on the chest 
and attached to shirt by an adhesive tape. The green and pink dashed lines correspond for T and P-waves, 
respectively.
 
Fig. 7.  Cardiac waveform filtered from 0.8 Hz to 3 Hz in a breath-hold period compared with ECG data. The 
green and pink dashed lines correspond for T and P-waves, respectively.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1392 
9
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-80062-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


## Page 10

synchronization15, which is compatible with our findings in this paper. Figure 7 also shows that P-waves can 
correspond for the peak value of displacements. However, wider bandwidth might be required for more details34.
Figure 8a represents the cardiac waveform filtered from 0.8 Hz to 6 Hz while the radar is located behind the 
seat and has the same height as heart during a breath-hold. Each heart cycle by radar signals has two sequential 
peaks and one valley. If valleys correspond for T-waves, the second peaks correspond for P-waves. Furthermore, 
when the participant is in a seated, calm state, the second peak is predominantly stronger than the first peak. 
However, when the radar is located on the chest and attached to the shirt by an adhesive tape34, the second peaks 
do not correspond for P-waves in cardiac waveform with the same filtering as can be seen in Fig. 8b. Additionally, 
our investigation into the influence of radar height revealed that similar cardiac waveforms are obtained when 
the radar height is within the range of HH +5 to HH -10, where HH represents heart height.
Figure 9 represents the cardiac waveform of a participant during a breath-hold after a jugging while the radar 
is located behind the seat at almost the same height as the heart. The cardiac waveform pattern is similar to a 
cardiac waveform during a calm state although HR is 98 beats per second. However, the first peak is stronger 
than the second peak in the heart displacements. In addition, the amplitude of cardiac waveform is almost 7 dB 
more than during a calm state which is a a physiological response to physical activities. Furthermore, P-waves 
in this measurement do not correspond to the second peak when T-waves are aligned with valleys. As a result, 
although cardiac waveform is a quasi-periodic signal, its valley can be reliably used for HRV estimation in 
different radar locations.
Fig. 10.  BR estimations were conducted using a dual radar setup at various BRs, including 9, 12, 15, and 17, 
under conditions where the participant remained without significant body movements: (a) desk radar and (b) 
seat radar.
 
Fig. 9.  The cardiac waveform of a participant during a breath-hold followed an exercise, with the radar 
positioned behind the seat at chest height. The green dashed lines correspond for T-waves.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1392 
10
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-80062-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


## Page 11

Validation of the proposed radar setup
Figure 10a,b represent BR estimation by desk and seat radars, respectively. In this scenario, the participant is 
asked to follow an online metronome for different BR rates58, including 9, 12, 15, and 17, while the participant 
did not have body movements. Between two different rates, there is a 20 to 30-second breath-hold period in 
which BR drops during a breath-hold period and displacement is less than 0.15 mm51. Table 2 compares the 
BR estimation errors for both radars. The results indicate that both radars have absolute errors of less than 1.12 
breaths per minute while the seat radar is slightly better than the desk radar in various BRs. However, body 
movements like head and hand movement can affect BR and HR estimations in desk radar more than seat 
radar. Furthermore, the estimated back wall displacements are less than chest wall displacements. Therefore, 
they might be affected by phase noise.
Figure 11 compares synchronized desk and seat radar results with ECG data for HR estimation. Both radars 
can track HR when there is no body movement. However, when there are head and hand movements that are 
quite possible to happen for seated people, the desk radar is affected more than the seat radar. As can be seen in 
Fig. 11, desk radar estimations for HR spikes incorrectly when there are body movements. However, seat radar 
is not affected by hand and head movements and can track HR accurately. Root mean squared error(RMSE) for 
the desk and chair radars are 7.9 beats and 4.1 beats, respectively. However, it cannot compare these two radars 
in terms of false estimations made by body movements. As a result, using radar behind the seat might reduce 
body movement effects, in particular head and hand movements.
Figure 12 compares the cardiac waveform resulting from two synchronized radars from behind the seat when 
there is no interference between them. The first radar is located at the same height as the heart. The second radar 
is located behind the participant’s waist. The second radar results are almost different from the first radar. Firstly, 
the valleys in the second radar are not strong enough to be reliably used for HRV estimation and the amplitude 
of displacement is also less than in the first radar. Secondly, the second radar results are less quasi-periodic. 
However, the period between the valleys of the first and the second radars remained constant.
One of the challenges in using radars is the effect of interference when there are a couple of radars in smart 
homes. In this paper, the effect of interference is evaluated by a dual radar setup, including the seat radar and 
the wall radar as can be seen in Fig. 6b. In the first experiment, the wall radar is blocked by a metallic sheet to 
minimize the effect of this radar on the seat radar while radars are sending signals without a time delay. In the 
second experiment, a metallic sheet does not block the wall radar and the time delay between radars is also zero. 
In the final experiment, radars are working with a 5 ms delay while a metallic sheet has not blocked the wall 
radar. This delay is almost two times the actual timing of a frame in each radar. Therefore, radars send signals 
separately in the time domain to have less interference effect. The average power in zero doppler in the second 
experiment is 0.7 dB greater than in the first experiment. However, the power difference between the first and the 
Fig. 11.  The comparison between the desk and the seat radars estimations for HR estimation based on ECG 
results.
 
BR
Desk radar average absolute error (breaths per minute)
Seat radar average absolute error (breaths per minute)
9
1.12
0.81
12
0.35
0.12
15
0.57
0.47
17
0.85
0.65
Table 2.  The average absolute errors of BR estimations in different BRs for desk and seat radars.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1392 
11
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-80062-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


## Page 12

last experiments is almost zero. As a result, this time delay configuration can solve interference issues in smart 
home monitoring.
Validation of the proposed algorithm for health monitoring using FMCW radar
Figure 13 represents seat radar results in different range bins for HR estimation. The seat radar estimation 
is based on these 4 range bins. Therefore, false estimations might be removed by using an outlier removal 
algorithm. However, using a single range bin could be affected by random body movements. Since, the human 
body captures more than one range bin when the radar is close to the human body, especially behind the seat, 
using multiple range bins can improve HR and cardiac waveform estimations.
Figure 14 compares the phase noise of a single chirp and averaged chirps in a frame. By taking an average 
of 32 chirps in a frame, the phase noise is suppressed by almost 10 dB. Since breathing displacements are much 
stronger than phase noise, using a single chirp can estimate displacements5. However, the cardiac waveform 
might be affected by the phase noise of a single chirp. As seen in Fig. 11, heart displacements reach 0.02 mm 
which could be affected by phase noise. As a result, using an average of multiple chirps in a frame can effectively 
improve cardiac waveform estimations.
Figure 15 depicts the heart displacement harmonics of a participant during a breath-hold while radar is 
located behind the seat at almost the same height as the heart. The lower and upper cut-off frequencies of the 
bandpass filter are 1 Hz and 3 Hz, respectively59. The estimated HR based on the radar results is 108 beats per 
second. However, the actual HR based on the ECG data is 55 beats per minute. The estimated HR by radar is 
Fig. 13.  The comparison between the different range bins in the seat radar for HR estimation with ECG.
 
Fig. 12.  Comparing cardiac waveforms captured by two synchronized radars from different positions, one 
situated at the heart height and the other behind the participant’s waist.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1392 
12
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-80062-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


## Page 13

two times of actual value. Therefore, the first peak, which is the actual HR is suppressed by the rising edge of 
the bandpass filter. As a result, it is necessary to reduce the lower cut-off frequency of the bandpass filter. In this 
paper, we applied the bandpass filter from 0.8 to 6 Hz.
Figure 16a,b show different IMF results while the participant had shallow and deep breathing, respectively, 
with a BR of 17 breaths per minute. In shallow breathing, the strongest IMF, which is also the lowest frequency 
component results from heart displacements. As a result, the HR is 60 beats per minute. In deep breathing, the 
strongest IMF which is IMF10 results from the second harmonic of breathing vibrations since it is two times of 
actual BR. IMF 9 is the main harmonic of heart displacements. Therefore, the HR is 57 beats per minute.
However, the cardiac waveform can be reconstructed by using multiple harmonics. In shallow breathing, the 
second harmonic of heart displacement is 120 beats per minute. Since this rate is not among the detected IMFs, 
it might be distorted by other harmonics. The third and fourth harmonics’ rates are 180 and 240 respectively. 
IMF 5 and IMF 3 correspond for the third and the fourth harmonics rate respectively. The reconstructed cardiac 
waveform based on this harmonic analysis is shown in Fig. 17a. The valleys can be aligned with T-waves. 
However, the waveform does not have two sequential peaks all the time similar to the breath-hold period. In 
deep breathing, the second harmonic of heart displacements interfered with other harmonics and cannot be 
recovered. However, the third harmonic of heart displacements is IMF4. The reconstructed cardiac waveform 
based on these harmonics is shown in Fig. 17b. The reconstructed cardiac waveform has two peaks. However, 
when valleys align with T-waves, P-waves do not align with the second peak. Therefore, during deep breathing, 
valleys correspond to T-waves and can be utilized for HRV estimation, like shallow breathing.
Figure 18a,b compare back wall displacements measured by radar from behind the seat before and after body 
movement compensation. As can be seen, body movements cause significant spikes in a short period. These 
spikes should be mitigated before cardiac waveform reconstruction. Otherwise, due to the strong amplitude, they 
corrupt the breathing band and heart band. The proposed approach for body movement detection can effectively 
detect all body movements. Figure 19 depicts the body movement compensation effect on BR estimation when 
actual BR is 24. As can be seen, due to the body movements, the estimated BR drops to almost 10 breaths per 
Fig. 15.  The heart displacements in the frequency domain during the breath-hold while the lower and upper 
cut-off frequencies of the bandpass filter are 1 Hz and 6 Hz, respectively.
 
Fig. 14.  Comparison between phase noise of a single chirp and averaged chirps in a frame with 32 chirps.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1392 
13
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-80062-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


## Page 14

minute. Table 3 compares the absolute estimation error of BR for different BRs during the body movements. As 
can be seen, when BR is high, the average absolute error of BR increases significantly.
Fig. 16.  Different IMFs results while the BR was 17 breaths per minute in two distinct breathing patterns: (a) 
shallow breathing and (b) deep breathing. b/m stands for beats per minute.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1392 
14
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-80062-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


## Page 15

Fig. 19.  BR estimation when actual BR is 24 from behind the seat before and after body movement 
compensation.
 
Fig. 18.  Displacements from behind the seat when radar has the same height as the heart: (a) before body 
movement compensation. (b) After body movement compensation.
 
Fig. 17.  The reconstructed cardiac waveform based on the harmonic analysis compared with ECG data 
while the BR was 17 breaths per minute in two distinct breathing patterns: (a) shallow breathing and (b) deep 
breathing.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1392 
15
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-80062-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


## Page 16

Cardiac waveform verification in subjects with heart conditions
Figure 20a depicts the cardiac waveform of an older adult subject with tachycardia condition, resulting in an 
elevated HR even during periods of rest. As illustrated, the cardiac waveform displays two peaks followed by a 
single valley in each cycle, with a resting HR of 101 beats per minute. Healthy subjects exhibit a similar cardiac 
waveform, with a normal HR during rest.
In addition, the first peak is stronger than the second peak which is similar to healthy subjects’ cardiac 
waveform after physical exercise. Figure 20b illustrates the cardiac waveform of an older adult subject with a 
prolonged QTc. The depicted waveform deviates from the typical pattern observed in healthy subjects, where 
two peaks are followed by a valley. In contrast, the subject with a prolonged QTc displays three peaks followed 
by a valley. This divergence from the norm suggests a potential heart condition. Therefore, variations in the 
derived cardiac waveform can serve as an indicator of underlying cardiac issues in comparison to the waveform 
observed in healthy individuals. It is notable that all four subjects with a prolonged QTc have normal HR and 
HRV in our experiments.
Discussion
Figure 21a compares the impact of different signal processing methods on the absolute IBI estimation error. The 
combination of the multi-bin approach with VMD demonstrates a median error reduction of approximately 20 
ms compared to the multi-bin approach without VMD. Notably, the maximum error also exhibits significant 
improvement, with a reduction of 57 ms. Additionally, the utilization of multiple bins also directly influences 
both the median and maximum IBI estimation errors. When VMD is also applied, there is an enhancement of 
approximately 8.2 ms in the median error and 20 ms in the maximum error. Furthermore, the study’s outcomes 
show a median IBI estimation error of 30 ms. These findings underscore the effectiveness of the proposed 
method in this paper.
To evaluate the proposed method’s robustness across diverse users, Fig. 21b depicts a comprehensive 
illustration of the distribution of absolute errors in IBI estimation for all eight participants. The findings reveal 
that our proposed method yields varying IBI estimation errors among different users from 17.5 to 42.8 ms, 
with an overall 95% confidence interval of [3.0075 ms, 65.2946 ms]. These variations can be attributed to a 
range of factors, including differences in individual physiological traits, such as body mass and variations in 
Fig. 20.  The cardiac waveform of two older adult subjects with two different heart conditions: (a) Tachycardia 
condition and (b) prolonged QTc.
 
BR
Average-error (breaths per minute)
9
0.9
11
1.1
14
2.9
16
5.7
18
8.1
22
11.5
24
13.2
Table 3.  The average absolute errors of BR estimations in different BRs during the body movements.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1392 
16
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-80062-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


## Page 17

cardiac strength. Importantly, it is evident that the 75th percentile error for all participants consistently remains 
below 62 ms. In addition, Table 4 also compares the absolute estimation error of HR for all participants. The 
results indicate that the absolute relative error for HR estimation reached 4.8%. To assess the accuracy of HRV 
estimation, Table 5 presents the estimated HRV metrics, including RMSSD, SDRR, and pNN50 for 8 participants. 
The results indicate that the proposed method achieves an average error of 6.1 ms for RMSSD, 6.7 ms for SDRR, 
and 6.3% for pNN50. These observations underscore the method’s resilience and effectiveness when applied to 
a diverse group of subjects.
Table 6 compares this study with recent publications across four criteria: body movement compensation, 
breathing harmonic cancellation, range bin sensitivity, and resultant outcomes. Emphasizing the necessity of 
addressing body movements and breathing harmonics in signal processing for realistic applications, the study 
highlights their significant impact on estimated vital signs. Additionally, the stability of radar integrated into 
furniture provides resilience against human manipulation, suggesting a reduced necessity for specific range bin 
selection in signal processing for the radar positioned behind the seat. The study’s outcomes show reliable results 
based on HRV metrics and HR errors.
Metrics
User ID
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
RMSSD 
(ms)
5.9
6.4
3.4
8.3
7.3
5.6
4.5
7.3
SDRR (ms)
11.2
5.8
3.8
7.6
6.5
7.2
5.3
6.5
pNN50 
(%)
6.1
11.1
4.6
6.5
4.5
4.2
6.1
7.3
Table 5.  HRV estimation errors in terms of RMSSD, SDRR, and pNN50 for 8 subjects.
 
User ID
Relative error (%)
1
5.2
2
5.1
3
4.6
4
2.9
5
5.9
6
5.4
7
4.6
8
4.7
Table 4.  The average absolute errors of HR estimations in different participants by the proposed method.
 
Fig. 21.  The error in absolute IBI estimation: (a) the impact of different signal processing approaches and (b) 
the impact of user diversity.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1392 
17
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-80062-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


## Page 18

Conclusions
In this investigation into cardiac health monitoring within smart furniture using a mm-Wave radar, our study 
reveals distinctive cardiac waveform patterns for healthy individuals, even during breathing, when the radar 
is strategically positioned behind the seat. This specific pattern includes two peaks and a valley in each cycle 
offering reliable HRV estimation, particularly with the valleys. Additionally, the cardiac waveform extracted from 
individuals with prolonged QTc is compared to that of healthy individuals. The comparison reveals distinguishable 
differences, indicating that those with this condition exhibit a different cardiac waveform compared to their 
healthy counterparts. Consequently, this distinctive cardiac waveform serves as a potential indicator for the 
detection of underlying heart issues. As a result, this system provides a low-power, cost-effective, and non-
contact solution for monitoring heart issues in elderly individuals who may forget to wear sensors, all while 
ensuring privacy. The proposed signal processing chain enables accurate IBI and HR estimation, with a median 
absolute error of approximately 30 ms for IBI and an average relative error of 4.8% for HR estimation, with an 
overall 95% confidence interval of [3.0075 ms, 65.2946 ms]. Furthermore, the study addresses seated individuals’ 
body movements using a time-domain approach, effectively detecting and mitigating these movements.
Data availability
The datasets used and/or analyzed during the current study are available upon request. For more information, 
please contact George Shaker at gshaker@uwaterloo.ca.
Received: 15 June 2024; Accepted: 14 November 2024
References
	 1.	 Singh, A., Rehman, S. U., Yongchareon, S. & Chong, P. H. J. Multi-resident non-contact vital sign monitoring using radar: A review. 
IEEE Sens. J. 21, 4061–4084 (2020).
	 2.	 Li, Q. et al. A UWB-radar-based adaptive method for in-home monitoring of elderly. IEEE Internet of Things J. 11(4), 6241–6252. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2023.3310204 (2024).
	 3.	 Mercuri, M. et al. 2-d localization, angular separation and vital signs monitoring using a siso fmcw radar for smart long-term 
health monitoring environments. IEEE Internet Things J. 8, 11065–11077 (2021).
	 4.	 Adib, F., Mao, H., Kabelac, Z., Katabi, D. & Miller, R. C. Smart homes that monitor breathing and heart rate. In Proceedings of the 
33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 837–846 (2015).
	 5.	 Shokouhmand, A., Eckstrom, S., Gholami, B. & Tavassolian, N. Camera-augmented non-contact vital sign monitoring in real time. 
IEEE Sens. J. 22, 11965–11978 (2022).
	 6.	 Wang, Y., Liu, Q. & Fathy, A.  E. Simultaneous localization and respiration detection of multiple people using low cost uwb 
biometric pulse doppler radar sensor. In 2012 IEEE/MTT-S International Microwave Symposium Digest, 1–3 (IEEE, 2012).
	 7.	 Ren, L., Wang, H., Naishadham, K., Kilic, O. & Fathy, A. E. Phase-based methods for heart rate detection using uwb impulse 
doppler radar. IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. 64, 3319–3331 (2016).
	 8.	 Ren, L. et al. Noncontact multiple heartbeats detection and subject localization using uwb impulse doppler radar. IEEE Microwave 
Wirel. Compon. Lett. 25, 690–692 (2015).
	 9.	 Mercuri, M. et al. Vital-sign monitoring and spatial tracking of multiple people using a contactless radar-based sensor. Nat. 
Electron. 2, 252–262 (2019).
	10.	 Park, J.-Y. et al. Preclinical evaluation of a noncontact simultaneous monitoring method for respiration and carotid pulsation using 
impulse-radio ultra-wideband radar. Sci. Rep. 9, 11892 (2019).
	11.	 Bujan, B. et al. Clinical validation of a contactless respiration rate monitor. Sci. Rep. 13, 3480 (2023).
	12.	 Roth, G. A. et al. The burden of cardiovascular diseases among us states, 1990–2016. JAMA Cardiol. 3, 375–389 (2018).
	13.	 Ahmed, S. et al. Noncontact assessment for fatigue based on heart rate variability using ir-uwb radar. Sci. Rep. 12, 14211 (2022).
	14.	 Toda, D., Anzai, R., Ichige, K., Saito, R. & Ueki, D. Ecg signal reconstruction using fmcw radar and convolutional neural network. 
In 2021 20th International Symposium on Communications and Information Technologies (ISCIT), 176–181 (IEEE, 2021).
	15.	 Grisot, R. et al. Monitoring of heart movements using an FMCW radar and correlation with an ECG. IEEE Trans. Radar Syst. 1, 
423–434. https://doi.org/10.1109/TRS.2023.3298348 (2023).
References
Body movement 
compensation
Breathing harmonic 
cancellation
Sensitivity to range 
bin selection
HRV metrics
HRV metrics error
HR 
error 
(%)
15
No
No
Yes
NA
NA
NA
34
No
No
No
RMSSD
NA
2.42
38
No
No
Yes
SDNN, RMSSD, LF, and HF
NA
2.07
39
No
No
Yes
NA
NA
1.3
40
No
No
Yes
NA
NA
NA
43
No
No
Yes
LF and HF
NA
NA
44
Yes
Yes
Yes
Mean IBI, RMSSD, SDRR, pNN50
3.9 ms, 6.4 ms, 6.4 ms, 2.6%
NA
37
Yes
Yes
Yes
SDNN, RMSSD
NA
NA
41
Yes
Yes
Yes
SDNN
6 ms
3
This study
Yes
Yes
No
RMSSD, SDRR, pNN50
4.5 ms, 6.1 ms, 6.7 ms, 6.3%
4.8
Table 6.  The comparison between this study and the recent published papers based on four factors, including 
body movement compensation, breathing harmonic cancellation, sensitivity to range bin selection, and 
achieved results.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1392 
18
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-80062-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


## Page 19

	16.	 Yang, Z., Bocca, M., Jain, V. & Mohapatra, P. Contactless breathing rate monitoring in vehicle using uwb radar. In Proceedings of 
the 7th International Workshop on Real-world Embedded Wireless Systems and Networks, 13–18 (2018).
	17.	 Alizadeh, M., Shaker, G., De Almeida, J. C. M., Morita, P. P. & Safavi-Naeini, S. Remote monitoring of human vital signs using 
mm-wave fmcw radar. IEEE Access 7, 54958–54968 (2019).
	18.	 Rong, Y., Dutta, A., Chiriyath, A. & Bliss, D. W. Motion-tolerant non-contact heart-rate measurements from radar sensor fusion. 
Sensors 21, 1774 (2021).
	19.	 Kakouche, I., Maali, A., El Korso, M. N., Mesloub, A. & Azzaz, M. S. Non-contact measurement of respiration and heart rates based 
on subspace methods and iterative notch filter using uwb impulse radar. J. Phys. D Appl. Phys. 55, 035401 (2021).
	20.	 Shah, S. A. & Fioranelli, F. Rf sensing technologies for assisted daily living in healthcare: A comprehensive review. IEEE Aerosp. 
Electron. Syst. Mag. 34, 26–44 (2019).
	21.	 Lee, Y. et al. A novel non-contact heart rate monitor using impulse-radio ultra-wideband (ir-uwb) radar technology. Sci. Rep. 8, 
13053 (2018).
	22.	 Zhao, M., Adib, F. & Katabi, D. Emotion recognition using wireless signals. In Proceedings of the 22nd Annual International 
Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking, 95–108 (2016).
	23.	 Han, Y., Lauteslager, T., Lande, T. S. & Constandinou, T. G. Uwb radar for non-contact heart rate variability monitoring and mental 
state classification. In 2019 41st Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), 
6578–6582 (IEEE, 2019).
	24.	 Wang, Z. et al. Heart rate variability in generalized anxiety disorder, major depressive disorder and panic disorder: A network 
meta-analysis and systematic review. J. Affect. Disord. 330, 259–266 (2023).
	25.	 Chen, J. et al. Contactless electrocardiogram monitoring with millimeter wave radar. IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 23, 270–285 
(2022).
	26.	 Zhao, H., Ma, Y., Han, Y., Tian, C. & Huang, X. T-HSER: Transformer network enabling heart sound envelope signal reconstruction 
based on low sampling rate millimeter wave radar. IEEE Internet of Things J. 11(1), 1616–1628. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​J​I​O​T​.​2​0​2​3​.​3​
2​9​1​0​5​1​ (2024).
	27.	 Chen, Z., Liu, Y., Sui, C., Zhou, M. & Song, Y. A Novel scheme for suppression of human motion effects in non-contact heart rate 
detection. IEEE Access 11, 84241–84257. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3302918 (2023).
	28.	 Shi, K. et al. Contactless analysis of heart rate variability during cold pressor test using radar interferometry and bidirectional lstm 
networks. Sci. Rep. 11, 3025 (2021).
	29.	 Park, J.-Y. et al. Preclinical evaluation of noncontact vital signs monitoring using real-time ir-uwb radar and factors affecting its 
accuracy. Sci. Rep. 11, 23602 (2021).
	30.	 Liang, X., Deng, J., Zhang, H. & Gulliver, T. A. Ultra-wideband impulse radar through-wall detection of vital signs. Sci. Rep. 8, 
13367 (2018).
	31.	 Yang, X., Zhang, Z., Huang, Y., Zheng, Y. & Shen, Y. Using a graph-based image segmentation algorithm for remote vital sign 
estimation and monitoring. Sci. Rep. 12, 15197 (2022).
	32.	 Conroy, T. B., Hui, X., Sharma, P. & Kan, E. C. Heart id: Biometric identification using wearable mimo rf heart sensors. IEEE J. 
Electromagn. RF Microw. Med. Biol. 7, 3–14 (2022).
	33.	 Hui, X., Conroy, T. B. & Kan, E. C. Multi-point near-field rf sensing of blood pressures and heartbeat dynamics. IEEE Access 8, 
89935–89945 (2020).
	34.	 Abu-Sardanah, S., Gharamohammadi, A., Ramahi, O. M. & Shaker, G. A wearable mm-wave radar platform for cardiorespiratory 
monitoring. IEEE Sens. Lett. 7, 1–4 (2023).
	35.	 Li, C. Vital-sign monitoring on the go. Nat. Electron. 2, 219–220 (2019).
	36.	 Straus, S. M. et al. Prolonged qtc interval and risk of sudden cardiac death in a population of older adults. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 47, 
362–367 (2006).
	37.	 Zhang, H. et al. Radar-beat: Contactless beat-by-beat heart rate monitoring for life scenes. Biomed. Signal Process. Control 86, 
105360 (2023).
	38.	 Petrović, V. L., Janković, M. M., Lupšić, A. V., Mihajlović, V. R. & Popović-Božović, J. S. High-accuracy real-time monitoring of 
heart rate variability using 24 ghz continuous-wave doppler radar. IEEE Access 7, 74721–74733 (2019).
	39.	 Zhang, S., Zheng, T., Chen, Z. & Luo, J. Can we obtain fine-grained heartbeat waveform via contact-free rf-sensing? In IEEE 
INFOCOM 2022-IEEE Conference on computer communications, 1759–1768 (IEEE, 2022).
	40.	 Fan, S. et al. Radiofrequency doppler echocardiography. Measurement 220, 113305 (2023).
	41.	 Chen, Z., Zheng, T., Cai, C. & Luo, J. Movi-fi: Motion-robust vital signs waveform recovery via deep interpreted rf sensing. In 
Proceedings of the 27th Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking, 392–405 (2021).
	42.	 Qiao, J.-H. et al. Contactless multiscale measurement of cardiac motion using biomedical radar sensor. Front. Cardiovasc. Med. 9, 
1057195 (2022).
	43.	 Yamamoto, K., Toyoda, K. & Ohtsuki, T. Spectrogram-based non-contact rri estimation by accurate peak detection algorithm. 
IEEE Access 6, 60369–60379 (2018).
	44.	 Wang, F., Zeng, X., Wu, C., Wang, B. & Liu, K. R. mmhrv: Contactless heart rate variability monitoring using millimeter-wave 
radio. IEEE Internet Things J. 8, 16623–16636 (2021).
	45.	 Klabunde, R. Cardiovascular physiology concepts (Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2011).
	46.	 Bagheri, M. O., Gharamohammadi, A., Abu-Sardanah, S., Ramahi, O. M. & Shaker, G. Radar near-field sensing using metasurface 
for biomedical applications. Commun. Eng. 3, 51 (2024).
	47.	 Gharamohammadi, A., Behnia, F. & Amiri, R. Imaging based on correlation function for buried objects identification. IEEE Sens. 
J. 18, 7407–7413 (2018).
	48.	 Gharamohammadi, A., Khajepour, A. & Shaker, G. In-vehicle monitoring by radar: A review. IEEE Sens. J. 23(21), 25650–25672. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2023.3316449 (2023).
	49.	 Zeng, X. et al. In-vehicle sensing for smart cars. IEEE Open J. Veh. Technol. 3, 221–242 (2022).
	50.	 Chmurski, M., Mauro, G., Santra, A., Zubert, M. & Dagasan, G. Highly-optimized radar-based gesture recognition system with 
depthwise expansion module. Sensors 21, 7298 (2021).
	51.	 Gharamohammadi, A., Pirani, M., Khajepour, A. & Shaker, G. Multi-bin breathing pattern estimation by radar fusion for enhanced 
driver monitoring. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. (2023).
	52.	 Li, C. & Lin, J. Optimal carrier frequency of non-contact vital sign detectors. In 2007 IEEE Radio and Wireless Symposium, 281–284 
(IEEE, 2007).
	53.	 Calculating your average torso length relative to height. https://hikemuch.com/average-torso-length/. Accessed: Jan. 02, 2023.
	54.	 Wang, B., Shi, W. & Miao, Z. Confidence analysis of standard deviational ellipse and its extension into higher dimensional 
euclidean space. PLoS ONE 10, e0118537 (2015).
	55.	 Infineon technologies bgt60tr13c. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​i​n​f​i​n​e​o​n​.​c​o​m​/​c​m​s​/​e​n​/​p​r​o​d​u​c​t​/​s​e​n​s​o​r​/​r​a​d​a​r​-​s​e​n​s​o​r​s​/​r​a​d​a​r​-​s​e​n​s​o​r​s​-​f​o​r​-​i​o​t​/​6​0​g​h​z​-​
r​a​d​a​r​/​b​g​t​6​0​t​r​1​3​c​/​. Accessed: Jan. 02, 2023.
	56.	 Frontier x belt. https://four​thfrontier.c​om/pages/fro​ntierx-for-​cardiac-care. Accessed: Oct. 23, 2023.
	57.	 Bioradio piezo electric respiratory effort belt. https:​//w​ww.glneurot​ech​.com/pr​oduct​/piezo-​e​lectric-res​pirato​ry-effort-belt/. 
Accessed: Oct. 23, 2023.
	58.	 Online metronome. https://metronome-online.com/15-bpm. Accessed: Jun. 17, 2022.
	59.	 Cho, H.-S., Choi, B. & Park, Y.-J. Monitoring heart activity using ultra-wideband radar. Electron. Lett. 55, 878–881 (2019).
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1392 
19
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-80062-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


## Page 20

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC), the Ontario 
Centres of Excellence (OCI), and the Mathematics of Information Technology and Complex Systems (MITACS). 
The clinical validation campaign was conducted at the Schlegel-UW Research Institute for Aging (RIA).
Author contributions
A.G. conceptualized the idea, developed the algorithms, improved the hardware data acquisition algorithm, and 
took the lead in drafting the manuscript. M.O.B. contributed to the writing process and extensively revised the 
manuscript. S.A.S., M.M.Y.R.R, H.A., and A.A. contributed to building the measurement setup and conducting 
experiments. K.W. and A.S. provided older adult subjects for the experiments and contributed to the experimen­
tal setup. D.C., S.A., and P.P.M. acted as medical supervisors. A.K. contributed to conceptualizing the idea and 
designing the experiments. G.S. was the technical supervisor, contributed to the writing process, and supervised 
all aspects of the project.
Funding
This work was supported by NSERC.
Declarations
Competing Interests
None of the authors have conflicts of interest to declare.
Additional information
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.G.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which 
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give 
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and 
indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s 
Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included 
in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or 
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy 
of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2025 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1392 
20
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-80062-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
